Acoustic Side-Channel Attacks on Printers
Michael Backes1,2 , Markus Dürmuth1, Sebastian Gerling1, Manfred Pinkal3 , Caroline Sporleder3
1

Saarland University, Computer Science Department, Saarbrücken, Germany
2

3

Max Planck Institute for Software Systems (MPI-SWS)

Saarland University, Computer Linguistics Department, Saarbrücken, Germany

Abstract

vey from a professional survey institute [26] in Germany
on this topic, with the following major lessons learned
(Figure 1 contains additional information from this survey):

We examine the problem of acoustic emanations of printers. We present a novel attack that recovers what a dotmatrix printer processing English text is printing based
on a record of the sound it makes, if the microphone is
close enough to the printer. In our experiments, the attack recovers up to 72 % of printed words, and up to
95 % if we assume contextual knowledge about the text,
with a microphone at a distance of 10cm from the printer.
After an upfront training phase, the attack is fully automated and uses a combination of machine learning, audio processing, and speech recognition techniques, including spectrum features, Hidden Markov Models and
linear classification; moreover, it allows for feedbackbased incremental learning. We evaluate the effectiveness of countermeasures, and we describe how we successfully mounted the attack in-field (with appropriate
privacy protections) in a doctor’s practice to recover the
content of medical prescriptions.

• About 60 % of all doctors in Germany use dot
matrix printers, for printing the patients’ health
records, medical prescriptions, etc. This corresponds to about 190,000 doctors and an average
number of more than 2.4 million records and prescriptions printed on average per day.
• About 30 % of all banks in Germany use dot matrix
printers, for printing account statements, transcripts
of transactions, etc. This corresponds to 14,000
bank branches and more than 1.2 million such documents printed on average per day.
• Only about 5 % of these doctors and about 8 %
of these banks currently plan to replace dot matrix
printers. The reasons for the continued use of dotmatrix printers are manifold: robustness, cheap deployment, incompatibility of modern printers with
old hardware, and overall the lack of a compelling
business reason of IT laymen why working IT hardware should be modernized.

1 Introduction
Information leakage caused by emanations from electronic devices has been a topic of concern for a long
time. The first publicly known attack of this type, published in 1985, reconstructed the monitor’s content from
its electromagnetic emanation [36]. The military had
prior knowledge of similar techniques [41, 20]. Related
techniques captured the monitor’s content from the emanations of the cable connecting the monitor and the computer [21], and acoustic emanations of keyboards were
exploited to reveal the pressed key [3, 42, 7]. In this work
we examine the problem of acoustic emanations of dotmatrix printers.

• Several European countries (e.g., Germany,
Switzerland, Austria, etc.) require by law the use
of dot-matrix (carbon-copy) printers for printing
prescriptions of narcotic substances [8].

1.1 Our contributions
We show that printed English text can be successfully
reconstructed from a previously taken recording of the
sound emitted by the printer. The fundamental reason
why the reconstruction of the printed text works is that,
intuitively, the emitted sound becomes louder if more
needles strike the paper at a given time (see Figure 2 for

Dot matrix printers? Didn’t these printers vanish in
the 80s already? Although indeed outdated for private
use, dot-matrix printers continue to play a surprisingly
prominent role in businesses where confidential information is processed. We commissioned a representative sur1

D OCTORS (n=541 ASKED )
Use dot-matrix printers
- for general prescriptions
- for other usages
Printer placed in proximity of patients
Replacement planned

BANKS (n=524 ASKED )
58.4 %
79.4 %
84.5 %
72.2 %
4.7 %

Use dot-matrix printers
- for bank statement printers
- for other usages
Printer placed in proximity of customers
Replacement planned

30.0 %
29.9 %
83.4 %
83.4 %
8.3 %

Figure 1: Main results of the survey on the usage of dot-matrix printers in doctor’s practices and banks [26]. Other
printer usages reported in the survey comprise: “certificate of incapacity for work, transferal to another doctor, hospitalization, and receipts” for doctors, and “account book, PIN numbers for online banking, supporting documents,
ATMs” for banks.
Overview of the approach. Our work addresses these
challenges, using a combination of machine learning
techniques for audio processing and higher-level information about document coherence. Similar techniques
are used in language technology applications, in particular in automatic speech recognition.
First, we develop a novel feature design that borrows
from commonly used techniques for feature extraction in
speech recognition and music processing. These techniques are geared towards the human ear, which is limited to approx. 20 kHz and whose sensitivity is logarithmic in the frequency; for printers, our experiments show
that most interesting features occur above 20 kHz, and a
logarithmic scale cannot be assumed. Our feature design
reflects these observations by employing a sub-band decomposition that places emphasis on the high frequencies, and spreading filter frequencies linearly over the
frequency range. We further add suitable smoothing to
make the recognition robust against measurement variations and environmental noise.
Second, we deal with the decay time and the induced
blurring by resorting to a word-based approach instead of
decoding individual letters. A word-based approach requires additional upfront effort such as an extended training phase (as a word-based dictionary is larger), and it
does not permit us to increase recognition rates by using, e.g., spell-checking. Recognition of words based on
training the sound of individual letters (or pairs/triples of
letters), however, is infeasible because the sound emitted
by printers blurs too strongly over adjacent letters. (Even
words that differ considerably on the letter basis may
yield highly similar overall sound features, which complicates the subsequent post-processing, see below.) This
complication was not present in earlier work on acoustic emanations of keyboards, since the time between two
consecutive keystrokes is always large enough that blurring was not an issue [42].

Figure 2: Print-head of an Epson LQ-300+II dot-matrix
printer, showing the two rows of needles.

a typical setting of 24 needles at the printhead). We verified this intuition and we found that there is a correlation between the number of needles and the intensity of
the acoustic emanation (see Figure 3). We first conduct a
training phase where words from a dictionary are printed,
and characteristic sound features of these words are extracted and stored in a database. We then use the trained
characteristic features to recognize the printed English
text. (Training and recognition on a letter basis, similar to [42], seems more appealing at first glance since it
naturally comprises the whole vocabulary. However, the
emitted sound is strongly blurred across adjacent letters,
rendering a letter-based approach much poorer than the
word-based approach, even if spell-checking is used, see
below).
This task is not trivial. Major challenges include:
(i) Identifying and extracting sound features that suitably capture the acoustic emanation of dot-matrix printers; (ii) Compensating for the blurred and overlapping
features that are induced by the substantial decay time of
the emanations; (iii) Identifying and eliminating wrongly
recognized words to increase the overall percentage of
correctly identified words (recognition rate).

Third, we employ speech recognition techniques to increase the recognition rate: we use Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) that rely on the statistical frequency of sequences of words in English text in order to rule out in2

Intensity

learning. We applied this implementation to four different English text documents, using a dictionary of about
1,400 words (including the 1,000 most frequently used
English words and the words that additionally occur in
these documents, see the second assumption above) and a
general-purpose corpus extracted from stable Wikipedia
articles that the HMM-based post-processing relies upon.
The prototype automatically recognizes these texts with
recognition rates of up to 72 %. To investigate the
impact of HMM-based post-processing with a domainspecific corpus instead of a general-purpose corpus on
the recognition rate, we considered two additional documents from a privacy-sensitive domain: living-will declarations. We used publicly available living-will declarations to extract a specialized corpus, thereby also
increasing the dictionary to 2,150 words. Our prototype automatically recognized the two target declarations
with recognition rates of about 64 % using the generalpurpose corpus, and increased the recognition rates to
72 % and 95 %, respectively, using the domain-specific
corpus. This shows that, somewhat expectedly, HMMbased post-processing is particularly worthwhile if prior
knowledge about the domain of the target document can
be assumed.
We have identified and evaluated countermeasures that
prevent this kind of attack. We found that fairly simple
countermeasures such as acoustic shielding and ensuring a greater distance between the microphone and the
printer suffice for most practical purposes.
Furthermore, we have successfully mounted the attack in-field in a doctor’s practice to recover the content of medical prescriptions. (For privacy reasons, we
asked for permission upfront and let the secretary print
fresh prescriptions of an artificial client.) The attack was
observer-blind and conducted under realistic – and arguably even pessimistic – circumstances: during rush
hour, with many people chatting in the waiting room.

Needles

Figure 3: Graph showing the correlation between the
number of needles striking the ribbon and the measured
acoustic intensity.
correct word combinations. The presence of strong blurring, however, requires the use of at least 3-grams on the
words of the dictionary to be effective, causing existing
implementations for this task to fail because of memory
exhaustion. To tame memory consumption, we implemented a delayed computation of the transition matrix
that underlies HMMs, and in each step of the search
procedure, we adaptively removed the words with only
weakly matching features from the search space.
Experiments, underlying assumptions and limitations. Before we describe our experiments, let us be
clear about the underlying assumptions that render our
approach possible. (i) The microphone (or bug) has
to be (surreptitiously) placed in close proximity (about
10cm) of the printer. (ii) Because our approach is wordbased for the reasons described above, it will only identify words that have been previously trained; feedbackbased incremental training of additional words is possible. While this is less a concern for, e.g., recovering
general English text and medical prescriptions, it renders
the attack currently infeasible against passwords or PIN
numbers. In the bank scenario, the approach can still be
used to identify, e.g., the sender, recipient, or subject of a
transaction. (iii) Conducting the learning phase requires
access to a dot matrix printer of the same model. There is
no need to get hold of the actual printer at which the target text was printed. (iv) If HMM-based post-processing
is used, a corpus of (suitable) text documents is required
to build up the underlying language model. Such postprocessing is not always necessary, e.g., our in-field attack in a doctor’s practice described below did not exploit
HMMs to recover medical prescriptions.
We have built a prototypical implementation that can
bootstrap the recognition routine from a database of
featured words that have been trained using supervised

1.2 Related work
Military organizations investigated compromising emanations for many years. Some of the results have been declassified: the Germans spied on the French field phone
lines in World War I [6], the Japanese spied on American cipher machines using electromagnetic emanations
in 1962 [1], the British spied on acoustic emanation of
(mechanical) Hagelin encryption devices in the Egyptian
embassy in 1956 [39, p. 82], and the British spied on parasitic signals leaked by the French encryption machines
in the 1950s [39, p. 109f].
The first publicly known attack we are aware of was
published in 1985, and exploited electromagnetic radiation of CRT monitors [36, 16]. Since then, various
forms of emanations have been exploited. Electromag3

Database

Acoustic feature extraction
Signals of
training data

Split recording
Compute raw
Noise reduction
into words
spectrum features

Language
model
computation

Features

(a) Training phase: extract acoustic and linguistic knowledge

Acoustic feature extraction
Unknown
attack data

Split recording
Compute raw
Noise reduction
into words
spectrum features

Features

Select
candidate
words

List of
words

HMM based
reordering

Recovered
text

(b) Recognition phase: recognize printed text using acoustic and linguistic features

Figure 4: Overview of the attack.

2 Attack Overview

netic emanations that constitute a security threat to computer equipment result from poorly shielded RS-232 serial lines [35], keyboards [2], as well as the digital cable
connecting modern LCD monitors [21]. We refer to [22]
for a discussion of the security limits for electromagnetic
emanation. The time-varying diffuse reflections of the
light emitted by a CRT monitor can be exploited to recover the original monitor image [19]; compromising reflections were studied in [5, 4]. Information leaking from
status LEDs was studied in [25].
Acoustic emanations were shown to divulge text typed
on ordinary keyboards [3, 42, 7], as well as information
about the CPU state and the instructions that are executed [33]. Acoustic emanations of printers were briefly
mentioned before [10]; it was solely demonstrated that
the letters “W” and “J” can be distinguished. This study
did not determine whether any other letters can be distinguished, let alone if a whole text can be reconstructed
by inspection of the recording, or even in an automated
manner.
Several techniques from audio processing are adapted
for use in our system. A central technique is feature extraction. We use features based on sub-band decomposition [27]. Alternative feature designs are based on the
(Short-time) Fast Fourier Transform [34], or on the Cepstrum transformation [11] which is the basis for Mel Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCC) [23, 15, 9, 24, 30].

In this section, we survey our attack without delving into
the technical details. We consider the scenario that English text containing potentially sensitive information is
printed on a dot-matrix printer, and the emitted sound is
recorded. We develop a methodology that on input the
recording automatically reproduces the printed text. Figure 4 presents a holistic overview of the attack.
The first phase (Figure 4(a)) constitutes the training
phase that can take place either before or after the attack.
In this phase, a sequence of words from a dictionary is
printed, and characteristic sound features of each word
are extracted and stored in a database. For obtaining the
best results, the setting should be close to the setting in
which the actual attack is mounted, e.g., similar environmental noise and acoustics. Our experiments indicate
that creating sufficiently good settings for reconstruction
does not pose a problem, see Section 4.3.2. The main
steps of the training phase are as follows:
1. Feature extraction. We use a novel feature design
that borrows from commonly used techniques for
feature extraction in speech recognition and music processing. In contrast to these areas, our experiments show that most interesting features for
printed sounds occur above 20 kHz, and that a logarithmic scale cannot be assumed for them. We
hence split the recording into single words based on
the intensity of the frequency band between 20 kHz
and 48 kHz, and spread the filter frequencies linearly over the frequency range. We subsequently
use digital filter banks to perform sub-band decomposition on each word [27]. As discussed in Section 3.1, sub-band decomposition gives better results than simple FFT because of better time res-

1.3 Paper outline
Section 2 presents a high-level description of our new
attack, with full technical details given in Section 3. Section 4 presents experimental results. Section 5 describes
the attack we conducted in-field. We conclude with some
final remarks in Section 6.
4

olution. The output of sub-band decomposition is
smoothed to make it more robust to measurement
variations and environmental noise. The extracted
features are stored in a database.

spelling might yield almost identical sound features.
We hence let the selected, trained word be a random
variable conditioned on the printed word, i.e., every
trained word will be a candidate with a certain probability. Using sufficiently good feature extraction
and distance computations between two features,
the probabilities of one or a few such trained words
will dominate for each printed word. The output
of the first recognition step is a list of most likely
candidates, given the acoustic features of the target
word.

2. Computation of language models. To solve the
recognition task, we will complement acoustic information with information about the occurrence
likelihood of words in their linguistic context (e.g.,
the sequence “such as the” is much more likely than
“such of the”). More specifically, we estimate for
each word in our lexicon n-gram probabilities, i.e.,
the likelihood that the word occurs after a sequence
of n − 1 given words. These probabilities make
up a (statistical) language model. Probabilities are
computed based on frequency counts of n-place sequences (n-grams) from a corpus of text documents.
We need to extract these frequencies from a sufficiently large corpus, which makes up the second
step of the training phase. In our experiments, we
used 3-gram frequencies extracted from a corpus of
10 million words of English text. For our domainspecific experiments, we used a corpus of livingwill declarations consisting of 14,000 words of English text.

2. Language-based reordering to reduce word error
rate. We finally try to find the most likely sequence of printed words given a ranked list of candidate words for each printed word. Although always
naively picking the most likely word based on the
acoustic signal might already yield a suitable recognition quality, we employ Hidden Markov Model
(HMM) technology, in particular language models
and the Viterbi algorithm (see Section 3.3.3 for details), which is regularly used in speech recognition,
to determine the most likely sequence of printed
words. Intuitively, this technology works well for us
because most errors that we encounter in the recognition phase are due to incorrectly recognized words
that do not fit the context; by making use of linguistic knowledge about likely and unlikely sequences
of words, we have a good chance of detecting and
correcting such errors. The use of HMM technology
yields accuracy rates of 70 % on average for words
for the general-purpose corpus, and up to 95 % for
the domain-specific corpus, see Section 3.3 for details.

The second phase (Figure 4(b)), called the recognition
phase, uses the characteristic features of the trained
words to recognize new sound recordings of printed text,
complemented by suitable language-correction techniques. The main steps are as follows:
1. Select candidate words. We start by extracting features of the recording of the printed target text, as in
the first step of the training phase. Let us call the obtained sequence of features target features whereas
the features from the training phase stored in the
database are henceforth referred to as trained features. Now, we subsequently compare, on a wordby-word basis, the obtained target features with
the trained features of the dictionary stored in the
database.

We modified the Viterbi algorithm to meet our specific needs: first, the standard algorithm accepts as
input a sequence of outputs, while we get for each
position an ordered list of likely candidates, and we
want to profit from this extra knowledge; second,
we need to decrease memory usage, since a standard
implementation would consume more than 30 GB
of memory.

If the features extracted from different recordings of
the same word were always identical, one would obtain a unique correspondence between trained features and target features (under the assumption that
all text words are in the dictionary). However, measurement variations, environmental noise, etc. show
that this is not the case. Multiple recordings of the
same word sometimes yield different features; for
example, printing the same word at different places
in the document results in differing acoustic emanations (Figure 10 illustrates how a single vertical line already differs in the intensity); conversely,
recordings of words that differ significantly in their

3 Technical Details
In this section we provide technical details about our attack, including the background in audio processing and
Hidden-Markov Models.

3.1 Feature extraction
We are faced with an audio file sampled at 96 kHz with
16bit.
5

To split the recording into words, we use a threshold
on the intensity of the frequency band from 20 kHz to
48 kHz. For printers, our experiments have shown that
most interesting features occur above 20 kHz, making
this frequency range a reliable indicator despite its simplicity; ignoring the lower frequencies moreover avoids
most noise added by the movement of the print-head etc.
From the split signal, we compute the raw spectrum
features by sub-band decomposition, a common technique in different areas of audio processing. The signal is
filtered by a filter bank, a parallel arrangement of several
bandpass filters tuned in steps of 1 kHz over the range
from 1 kHz to 48 kHz.
For noise reduction the output of the filters is
smoothed, normalized, the amount of data is reduced (the
maximal value out of 5 is kept), and smoothed again. The
result is appropriately discretized over time and forms a
set of vectors, one vector for each filter.
The feature design has a major influence on the running time and storage requirements of the subsequent
audio processing. We have experimented with several
alternative feature designs, but obtained the best results
with the design described above. The (Short-time) Fast
Fourier Transform (SFFT) [34] seems a natural alternative to sub-band decomposition. There is, however, a
trade-off between the frequency and the time resolution,
and we obtain worse results in our setting when we used
SFFTs, similar to earlier observations [42].

features. We punish too large deviations by multiplying
with a factor of 1.2 if the length of the query and the
database entry differ by more than a defined threshold.
The factor and the threshold are derived from our experiments. Third, we discard entries whose length deviates
from the target feature by more than 15 % in order to
speed up the computation.
Using the angle to compare features is a common technique. Other approaches that are used in different scenarios include the following: Müller et al. present an
audio matching method for chroma based features that
handles tempo differences [28]. Logan and Salomon use
signatures based on clustered MFCCs as input for the
distance calculation in [24]. Furthermore, they use the
earth mover’s distance [32] for the signatures (minimum
amount of work to transform one signature into another)
and the Kullback Leibler (KL) distance for the clusters
inside the signature as distance measures.

3.3 Post-processing using HMM technology
In this section we describe techniques based on language
models to further improve the quality of reconstruction.
These improve the word recognition rate from 63 %
to 70 % on average, and up to 72 % in some cases.
The domain-specific HMM-based post-processing even
achieves recognition rates of up to 95 %.

3.2 Select candidate words
3.3.1 Introduction to HMMs

Deciding which database entry is the best match for a
recording is based on the following distance function defined on features; the tool outputs the 30 most similar
entries along with the calculated distance. Given the features extracted from the recording (~x1 , . . . , ~xt ) and the
features of a single database entry (~y1 , . . . , ~yt ) we compute the angle between each pair of vectors ~xi , ~yi and
sum over all frequency bands:

Hidden Markov models (HMMs) are graphical models
for recovering a sequence of random variables which
cannot be observed directly from a sequence of (observed) output variables. The random variables are modeled as hidden states, the output variables as observed
states. HMMs have been employed for many tasks that
deal with natural language processing such as speech
recognition [31, 18, 17], handwriting recognition [29] or
part-of-speech tagging [12, 14].
Formally, an HMM of order d is defined by a five-tuple
hQ, O, A, B, Ii, where Q = (q1 , q2 , ..., qN ) is the set of
(hidden) states, O = (o1 , o2 , ..., oM ) is the set of observations, A = Qd+1 is the matrix of state transition probabilities (i.e., the probability to reach state qd+1 when
being in state qd with history q1 , . . . , qd−1 ), B = Q × O
are the emission probabilities (i.e., the probability of observing a specific output oi when being in state qj ), and
I = Qd is the set of initial probabilities (i.e., the probability of starting in state qi ). Figure 5 shows a graphical representation of an HMM, where unshaded circles
represent hidden states and shaded circles represent observed states.

∆((~x1 , . . . , ~xt ), (~y1 , . . . , ~yt ))


X
~xi · ~yi
arccos
=
.
|~xi | · |~yi |
i=1,...,t
To increase robustness and decrease computational complexity in practical scenarios, some problems need to be
addressed: First, our implementation of cutting the audio file sometimes errs a bit, which leads to slightly nonmatching samples. Thus we consider minor shiftings of
each sample by tiny amounts (two steps in each direction,
or a total of 5 measurements) and take the minimum angle (i.e., the maximum similarity). Second, for a similar
reason, we tolerate some deviation in the length of the
6

q1

a12

b11

o1

q2

a23

b22

o2

q3

a34

.......

b33

aN −1,N

qN

eN M

o3

oM

Figure 5: Hidden Markov Model

In our setting the words that were printed are unknown
and correspond to the hidden states. The observed states
are the output of the first stage of reconstruction from
the acoustic signals emitted by the printer. What makes
HMMs particularly attractive for our task is that they allow us to combine two sources of information: first, the
acoustic information present in the observed signal, and
second, knowledge about likely and unlikely word combinations in a well-formed text. Both sources of information are important for recovering the original text.
To utilize HMMs for our task, we need to solve two
problems: we need to estimate the model parameters of
the HMM (training phase), and we need to determine the
most likely sequence of hidden states for a sequence of
observations given the model (recognition phase). The
method described in Section 3.2 approximates the estimation of the emission probabilities by computing a
ranking of the candidate words given an observed acoustic signal. The initial probabilities, which model the
probability of starting in a given state, and the transition probabilities, which model the likelihood of different words following each other in an English text, can
be obtained by building a language model from a large
text corpus. To address the second problem, determining the most likely sequence of hidden states (i.e., the
most likely sequence of printed words in the target text),
we can use the Viterbi algorithm [37]. In the following
two sections, we describe in more detail how we compute the language models and how the candidate words
are reordered by applying the Viterbi algorithm.

quences in biomedical texts. To cover a large range of
domains and thus make our model robust in the face of
arbitrary input texts, we train the language model on a
diverse selection of stable Wikipedia articles. The corpus has a size of 63 MB and contains approximately 10
million words. For our domain-specific experiments, we
used a corpus of living-will declarations consisting of
14,000 words of English text. From the corpus, we extracted all 3-grams and computed their frequencies.1 We
took into consideration all 3-grams that appeared at least
3 times. As n-grams with probability 0 will never be
selected by the Viterbi algorithm, we smooth the probabilities by assigning a small probability to each unseen
n-gram.
The length of an n-gram determines how many words
of context (i.e., how many previous hidden states in the
HMM) are taken into account by the language model.
Higher values for n can lead to better models but also
require exponentially larger corpora for an accurate estimation of the n-gram probabilities. The higher the value
of n, the larger the likelihood that some n-grams never
appear in the corpus, even though they are valid word
sequences and thus may still appear in the printed text.

3.3.3 Reordering of candidate words based on language models
Having built the language model, we can reorder the
candidate words using the model to select the most
likely word sequence (i.e., the most likely sequence
of hidden states). This task is addressed by the
Viterbi algorithm [37], which takes as input an HMM
hQ, O, A, B, Ii of order d and a sequence of observations a1 , . . . , aT ∈ OT . Its state consists of Ψ = T ×Qd.
First, the d-th step is initialized (the earlier are unused)
according to the initial distribution, weighted with the

3.3.2 Building the language models
A language model of size n assigns a probability to each
sequence of n words. The probability distribution can be
estimated by computing the frequencies of all n-grams
from a large text corpus. Note that language models are
to some extent domain and genre dependent, i.e., a language model built from a corpus of financial texts will
not be a very good model for predicting likely word se-

1 All 3-grams were converted to lower case and punctuation charac-

ters were stripped off.

7

observations:
Ψd,i1 ,...,id = Ii1 ,...,id

Y

Bik ,ak

normal office with the door closed and no people talking
inside the room. There was no special shielding against
noise from the outside (e.g., traffic noise). In the training
phase we used a dictionary containing 1,400 words; the
dictionary consists of a list of the 1,000 most frequent
words from our corpus augmented with the words that
appeared in our example texts.2 Inflected forms, capitalization, as well as words with leading punctuation marks
need to be counted as different words, as their sound features might significantly differ (blurring propagates from
left to right within a word).
We work with the sound recordings of four different
articles from Wikipedia on different topics: two articles
on computer science (on source-code and printers), one
article on politics (on Barack Obama), and one article
on art (on architecture) with a total of 1,181 words to
evaluate the attack.
The training and matching phase have been implemented in MATLAB using the Signal Processing Toolbox – a MATLAB extension which allows to conveniently process audio signals. The HMM-based postprocessing is implemented in C. The tool is fully automated, with the only exceptions being threshold values
that need manual adaption for a given attack scenario. In
the scenario with the microphone placed 10cm in front
of the printer obtaining the threshold values is straightforward, as they can be determined directly from the
intensity plots. In case of a more blurred signal (e.g.,
due to a larger distance), we iteratively determined suitable values, essentially by trial-and-error. The training
phase takes a one-time effort of several hours for building up the sound feature database for the words in the
dictionary. The recognition phase takes approximately
2 hours for matching one page of text, including full
HMM-based post-processing. Memory usage of the procedure is substantial, because the feature database and
the HMM-related information are kept in main memory
to speed up computation. Trade-offs with less memory
consumption but larger execution times can easily be realized.

∀ 1 ≤ i, j ≤ N.

k=1,...,d

In the recursion, for increasing indices s, the maximum
of all previous values is taken:

Ψs,i1 ,...,id = Bid ,as max Ai0 ,i1 ,...,id Ψs−1,i0 ,...,id−1
i0 ∈Q

∀ s > d, 1 ≤ i, j ≤ N.

Finally, the sequence of hidden states can be obtained
by backtracking the indices that contributed to the maximum in the recursion step.
The memory required to store the state Ψ is O(T ·N d ),
and the running time is O(T · N d+1 ), as we are optimizing over all N hidden states for each cell, so memory requirements are a major challenge in implementing
the Viterbi algorithm. For example, using a dictionary
of 1, 000 words, the memory requirements of our implementation for 3-grams are slightly above 2 GB, and is
growing quadratically in N .
We use two techniques to overcome these problems:
1. First, instead of storing the complete transition matrix A we compute the values on-the-fly (keeping
only the list of 3-grams in memory).
2. Second, we do not optimize over all possible words,
but only over the M = 30 best rated words from
the previous stage. This brings down memory requirements to O(T · M d ) and execution time to
O(T · M d+1 ). The size of Ψ in this case is 130 MB
for 3-grams.
Further improvements are conceivable, e.g., by using
parallel scalability [40].

4 Experiments and Statistical Evaluation
In this section we describe our experiments for evaluating the attack. In addition to describing the set-up and the
experimental results on the recognition rate for sample
articles, we present our experiments for evaluating the
influence of using different microphones, printers, fonts,
etc. on the recognition rate; moreover, we identify and
evaluate countermeasures.

4.2 Results
The recognition rates for the four articles in our experiments are depicted in Figure 6. The first row shows
the recognition rates if no HMM-based post-processing
is used, i.e., these numbers correspond to the output of
the matching phase. For illustration, we wrote in brackets the rate that the correct word was within the three

4.1 Setup
We use an Epson LQ-300+II (24 needles) without printer
cover and the in-built mono-spaced font for printing
texts. The sound is recorded from a short distance using a Sennheiser MKH-8040 microphone with nominal
frequency range from 30 Hz to 50 kHz. If nothing additional is mentioned the experiments were conducted in a

2 In a real attack, ensuring that (almost) all words of the text occur in the dictionary can be achieved using several techniques: Using
contextual knowledge to reduce the number of words that are likely to
appear in the text, training a larger dictionary, or using feedback-based
learning to subsequently add missing words to the dictionary.

8

Text 1

Text 2

Text 3

Text 4

Overall

Basic Top 1 (Top 3) 60.5 % (75 .1 %) 66.5 % (79 .2 %) 62.8 % (78 .7 %) 61.5 % (77.9 %) 62.9 % (78 .0 %)
HMM 3-gram
66.7 %
71.8 %
71.2 %
69.0 %
69.9 %

Figure 6: Recognition rates of our four sample articles. The first row shows the recognition rates if no HMM-based
post-processing is used; the second row depicts the recognition rates after applying post-processing with HMMs based
on 3-grams using a general-purpose corpus.
Declaration 1
Basic Top 1 (Top 3)
HMM 3-gram (using general-purpose corpus)
HMM 3-gram (using domain-specific corpus)

Declaration 2

59.5 % (77 .8 %) 57.5 % (72 .6 %)
68.3 %
60.8 %
95.2 %
72.5 %

Figure 7: Recognition rates of our two additional documents using domain-specific HMM-based post-processing.
The first row shows the recognition rates without HMM-based post-processing; the second and third rows depict the
recognition rates after applying post-processing with HMMs based on 3-grams using a general-purpose corpus and a
domain-specific corpus, respectively.

4.3 Discussion and Supplemental Experiments

highest-ranked words in the matching phase. The second row depicts the recognition rates after applying postprocessing with HMMs based on 3-grams. We thus
achieve recognition rates between 67 % and 72 % for
the four articles.

We have evaluated the influence on the recognition rate
of using different microphones, different printers, proportional fonts, etc., and we investigated why the reconstruction works from a conceptual perspective. In a nutshell, the results can be summarized as follows (details
are given below): Several parameters of modified set-ups
did not affect the recognition rate and gave comparable
results, e.g., using cheaper microphones or using different printers (of the same model) for the training phase
and the recognition phase. Using proportional instead
of mono-spaced fonts or using different printer models
only slightly decreased the recognition rate. Some considerably stronger modifications, however, did not work
out at all, and they can be seen as conceptual limitations
of our attack. This comprises using completely different printer technologies such as ink-jet or laser printers
(because of the absence of suitable sound emissions that
can be used to mount the attack). We provide statistical
results on these modifications below. Furthermore, we
evaluate countermeasures.

While the aforementioned results employ HMMbased post-processing using a general-purpose corpus,
our experiments indicate that domain-specific corpora
yield even better results. Recall that we considered two
additional documents containing living-will declarations
that we intended to analyze using a domain-specific corpus. The recognition rates for the two living-will declarations are depicted in Figure 7. The first / second row
again depict the results without / with general-purpose
HMM-based post-processing; the third row shows the results for HMM-based post-processing using the domainspecific corpus. We achieve recognition rates of 95.2 %
and 72.5 % for the two documents, respectively. Text
examples for the reconstruction using a general-purpose
corpus and a domain-specific corpus are provided in Appendix A and Appendix B, respectively.
We also experimented with 4-gram and 5-gram language models. In addition to encountering even more
severe problems of memory consumptions, our experiments indicated that the recognition rates do not improve
over 3-grams. While this behavior might be surprising at
a first glance, it can be explained by the sparseness of the
training data: The number of 5-grams that we can extract
from our corpus is approx. 107 , but the transition matrix
of an HMM based on 5-grams on a dictionary of 1,000
words has 1015 entries; thus the number of 5-grams is
too small compared to the number of entries. For similar
reasons 4-grams and 5-grams are rarely used in natural
language processing.

4.3.1 Using different microphones
Our experiments have indicated that information that is
relevant for us is carried in the frequency range above
approximately 20 kHz, see Section 3. Microphones with
nominal frequency range higher than 20 kHz are rather
expensive, e.g., the Sennheiser microphone referred to
in Section 4.1 has a frequency range up to 50 kHz and
costs approximately 1,300 dollars. However, our experiments have shown that some microphones with a nominal frequency range of 20 kHz are sensitive to higher fre9

Top 1

(Top 3)

Sennheiser MKH-8040 microphone and Epson
LQ-300+II printer

62 %

(78 %)

Behringer B-5 microphone
Sennheiser ME 2 clip-on microphone

59 %
57 %

(85 %)
(72 %)

OKI Microline 1190 printer
Another Epson LQ-300+II

41 %
54 %

(51 %)
(72 %)

Proportional font

57 %

(71 %)

Figure 8: Results of the reconstruction with different microphone models and different printer models. (These control
experiments were conducted on shorter texts and corpora than the previous experiments and no HMM-based postprocessing was applied.)
quencies as well (possibly with less accurate frequency
response, but this had no noticeable influence on the
recognition rate as long as we use the same microphone
for recording both the training data and the attack data).
Figure 8 shows in the second row the recognition rates
of one sample article if a Behringer B-5 microphone is
used, which has a nominal frequency range up to 20 kHz
and costs approximately 80 dollars. The results obtained
with the Behringer microphone are only slightly worse
than the results using the Sennheiser microphone.
We also conducted an experiment using a small clipon microphone – a Sennheiser ME 2 with nominal frequency range up to 18 kHz, which costs approximately
130 dollars. The recognition rates of one sample article are shown in the third row of Figure 8; they are
again only slightly worse than the rates with the larger
Sennheiser microphone.

Figure 9: Ink-jet printer, disassembled for analysis.
ure 8, indicating a decrease of recognition rate of about
8 % compared with the results from Section 4.2.
This shows that it is practical to train a large dictionary
offline. In the in-field attack described in Section 5 we
use this result and train a dictionary on a separate printer.

4.3.2 Using different dot-matrix printers
We also evaluated if the printer model influences the
recognition rate. The fourth row of Figure 8 shows the
recognition rates of one article printed with an OKI Microline 1190 printer. The recognition rate is not as good
as for the Epson printer, but it is still good.
So far we always considered the set-up that training
data and the attacked text are printed on the same printer.
In a realistic attack scenario, however, it is unlikely
that the attacker can print the training data on the same
printer, but instead arranges access to another printer of
the same printer model that he places in an acoustically
similar environment. Our in-field attack described in detail in Section 5 is of this kind.
We demonstrate that the recognition rate only decreases slightly when using a different printer in the
training phase. For this experiment we used the feature
database that we previously recorded in the experiment
described in Section 4.2, and printed one article on another Epson LQ-300+II printer that we bought from a
different vendor. The recognition rate is shown in Fig-

4.3.3 Using proportional fonts
Monospaced fonts are commonly used in many applications of dot-matrix printers; in particular, the in-built
fonts are monospaced, and most applications seem to use
these in-built fonts. Using proportional fonts instead intuitively relies on a more compact depiction of words that
amplifies the effect of blurring. However, our experiments demonstrate that the recognition still works well,
at a slightly lower rate (see Figure 8).
4.3.4 On attacking other printer technologies
While dot-matrix printers are still deployed in some
security-critical applications (see Figure 1), they have
been replaced by other printer technologies such as inkjet printers (see Figure 9) and laser printers in other applications. Ink-jet printers might be susceptible to similar attacks, as they construct the printout from individ10

Intensity

Intensity

Samples

Intensity

Intensity

Samples

Samples

Samples

Figure 10: Each graph shows the intensity measured when printing a single vertical line, demonstrating the variations
that can occur.
ual dots, as dot-matrix printers do. On the one hand,
the bubbles of ink might produce shock-waves in the air
that potentially can be captured by a microphone; on the
other hand, the piezo-electric elements used in some inkjet printers might produce noise that can be measured.
However, we were not able to capture these emanations.
One reason might be that these faint sounds, if they exist, are dominated by the noise emitted by the mechanical parts of a printer. For laser printers, one expects that
no information about the printed text is leaked, and our
experiments support this view. Thus, to the best of our
knowledge, these printer technologies seem to be unaffected by this kind of attack.

Top 1

(Top 3)

Short distance, no cover

62 %

(78 %)

With cover
With foam box
From 2 meters
Closed door

24 %
51 %
4%
0%

(35 %)
(63 %)
(6 %)
(0 %)

Figure 11: More results of the reconstruction evaluating
the effectiveness of different countermeasures. (These
control experiments were conducted on a shorter text
than the previous experiments, no HMM-based postprocessing was applied.)

4.4 Countermeasures

emanation (see Figure 11). To further evaluate this idea,
we built a box out of ordinary acoustic foam and placed
the printer inside (shown in Figure 12). In contrast to the
results with the cover, the recognition rate for the foam
box was surprisingly good; 51 % of the words were reconstructed successfully. We believe that the shielding
characteristics of the two types of foam suppress different ranges of the acoustic spectrum and thus have different effects on the reconstruction rate.

The (obvious) idea that underlies all countermeasures is
to suppress the acoustic emanations so far that reconstruction becomes hard in practical scenarios.
Acoustic shielding foam: The specific printer model that
we used in most experiments has an optional printer
cover with embedded acoustic shielding foam. Closing
this cover absorbs a substantial amount of the acoustic
11

Figure 12: Printer in foam box for shielding evaluation.

Figure 13: The setup of the in-field attack.

Distance: Our experiments indicate that the recognition rate drops substantially if the distance between the
printer and the microphone is increased. From a distance
of 2 meters, the recognition rate drops to approximately
4 % (see Figure 11). From this distance our algorithm for
splitting the signal into words requires manual intervention, as the audio signal contains more noise. However,
we stress that this limitation can be circumvented in an
in-field attack by placing a miniaturized wireless bug in
close proximity to (or even in) the printer.

arguably even pessimistic – circumstances: during rush
hour, with many people chatting in the waiting room.
We recorded the emitted sounds of printing seven different prescriptions. We handed over all sound recordings, the printouts of six prescriptions, and a printer of
the same type (an Epson LQ-570) that we bought at Ebay
to one of the authors of this paper. The printouts were
only used to determine which parts of the sound recording correspond to which parts of the prescription. The
attack was carried out blindly, i.e, this author obtained
no information about the seventh prescription except for
its recorded sound.
The author carrying out the attack took the following
steps:

Closed door: We also tested the reconstruction from outside the printer’s room with the door closed; the overall distance between the printer and the microphone was
4 meters. As expected, we found that in this setup no
reconstruction was possible at all.

1. From the available printouts, he first identified the
position of the prescribed medication, the direction
of printing, and the used font.

Our results indicate that ensuring the absence of microphones in the printer’s room is sufficient to protect
privacy. Unfortunately, this evaluation is not guaranteed to be complete; we merely state that our attack does
not work under these circumstances. However, we believe that the potential for improvement is limited; thus
the above discussion still provides reasonable estimates.
As future work, we furthermore plan to investigate additional countermeasures such as introducing randomness
into the printer’s sound through software changes, e.g.,
by letting the printer print individual letters in a (somewhat) randomized order instead of always proceeding
left-to-right.

2. Using a suitable threshold, he subsequently determined the correct length and the white-space positions.
3. From a publicly available medication directory with
about 14,000 different medications, he then determined possible candidates that matched these
lengths. Here, abbreviations of words were also
taken into account. The list of remaining candidates
consisted of 29 entries.
4. The selection of candidate words (without HMMbased post-processing) then already revealed the
correct medication out of the remaining 29 candidates.

5 In-field Attack

The correct medication was “Müller’sche Tabletten bei Halsschmerzen”, a medication against sore
throat. The printing was even abbreviated on the
prescription as

We have successfully mounted the attack in-field in a
doctor’s practice to recover the content of medical prescriptions (the setup of the attack is shown in Figure 13).
For privacy reasons, we asked for permission upfront and
let the secretary print fresh prescriptions of an artificial
client. The attack was conducted under realistic – and

Müller’sche Tabletten bei
Halsschm.
12

The attack was actually easier to conduct in this practical scenario compared to the experiments in Section 4,
because we were able to substantially narrow down the
list of candidates by taking into account length information of the medication. Admittedly, the secretary herself
unintentionally simplified this task by selecting a long
medication name consisting of several words.

[5] Michael Backes, Markus Dürmuth, and Dominique
Unruh. Compromising reflections – or – how to
read LCD monitors around the corner. In Proc.
2008 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy
(Oakland 2008), pages 158–169. IEEE Computer
Society, 2008.
[6] Arthur O. Bauer. Some aspects of military line
communications as deployed by the german armed
forces prior to 1945. In The History of Military Communications, Proc. 5th Annual Colloquium. Centre for the History of Defence Electronics, Bournemouth University, 1999.

6 Conclusion
We have presented a novel attack that takes as input a
sound recording of a dot-matrix printer processing English text, and recovers up to 72 % of printed words.
If we assume contextual knowledge about the text, the
attack achieves recognition rates up to 95 %. After an
upfront training phase, the attack is fully automated and
uses a combination of machine learning, audio processing and speech recognition techniques, including spectrum features, Hidden Markov Models and linear classification; moreover, it allows for feedback-based incremental learning. We have identified and evaluated countermeasures that are suitable to prevent this kind of attack. We have successfully mounted the attack in-field in
a doctor’s practice to recover the content of medical prescriptions under realistic conditions. Moreover, we have
shown the relevance of this attack by commissioning a
representative survey that showed that dot-matrix printers are still deployed in a variety of sensitive areas, in
particular by banks and doctors.

[7] Yigael Berger, Avishai Wool, and Arie Yeredor.
Dictionary attacks using keyboard acoustic emanations. In Proc. 13th ACM Conference on Computer
and Communication Security (CCS 2006), pages
245–254. ACM, 2006.
[8] Eckhard Beubler. Schmerzbehandlung in der Palliativmedizin, chapter Rezeptur in verschiedenen
europäischen Ländern: gesetzliche Grundlagen,
pages 249–255. Springer, 2006.
[9] Thomas L. Blum, Douglas F. Keislar, James A.
Wheaton, and Erling H. Wold. United states patent
5918223: Method and article of manufacture for
content-based analysis, storage, retrieval, and segmentation of audio information, 1999.

References

[10] Roland Briol. Emanation: How to keep your data
confidential. In Proc. Symposium on Electromagnetic Security for Information Protection, 1991.

[1] National Security Agency. TEMPEST: A signal
problem. Available online at http://www.nsa.
gov/public/pdf/tempest.pdf, 1972.

[11] Donald G. Childers, David P. Skinner, and
Robert C. Kemerait. The cepstrum: A guide to processing. In Proc. of the IEEE, volume 65, pages
1428–1443, 1977.

[2] Ross J. Anderson and Markus G. Kuhn. Soft tempest – an opportunity for NATO. In Information
Systems Technology (IST) Symposium “Protecting
NATO Information Systems in the 21st Century”,
1999.

[12] Kenneth W. Church. A stochastic parts program
and noun phrase parser for unrestricted text. In
Proc. of ANLP-2, pages 136–143, 1988.
[13] Trial Data Inc.
Do your own will | free
living will forms. Online at http://www.
doyourownwill.com/lw/aklw.doc, 2010.

[3] Dmitri Asonov and Rakesh Agrawal. Keyboard
acoustic emanations. In Proc. 2004 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (Oakland 2004),
pages 3–11, 2004.

[14] Steven DeRose. Grammatical category disambiguation by statistical optimization. Computational Linguistics, 14(1):31–39, 1988.

[4] Michael Backes, Tongbo Chen, Markus Dürmuth,
Hendrik P. A. Lensch, and Martin Welk. Tempest
in a teapot: Compromising reflections revisited. In
Proc. 2009 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (Oakland 2009), pages 315–327. IEEE Computer Society, 2009.

[15] Jonathan T. Foote. Content-based retrieval of music and audio. In Proc. of Multimedia Storage and
Archiving, volume 3229, pages 138–147, 1997.
[16] Harold Joseph Highland. Electromagnetic radiation
revisited. Comput. Secur., 5(2):85–93, 1986.
13

[30] Francois Pachet and Jean-Julien Aucouturier. Music similarity measures: What’s the use? In Proc.
3rd International Conference on Music Information
Retrieval, 2002.

[17] Frederick Jelinek. Statistical Models for Speech
Recognition. MIT Press, 1998.
[18] Biing-Hwang Juang and Lawrence R. Rabiner.
Hidden markov models for speech recognition.
Technometrics, 33(3):251–272, 1991.

[31] Lawrence R. Rabiner. A tutorial on hidden markov
models and selected applications in speech recognition. Proc. of the IEEE, 77(2):257–286, 1989.

[19] Markus G. Kuhn. Optical time-domain eavesdropping risks of CRT displays. In Proc. 2002
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (Oakland 2002), pages 3–18, 2002.

[32] Yossi Rubner, Carlo Tomasi, and Leonidas J.
Guibas. The earth mover’s distance as a metric for
image retrieval. Int. Journal of Computer Vision,
40(2):99–121, 2000.

[20] Markus G. Kuhn. Compromising Emanations:
Eavesdropping Risks of Computer Displays. PhD
thesis, University of Cambridge, 2003.

[33] Adi Shamir and Eran Tromer. Acoustic cryptanalysis – On nosy people and noisy machines. Available
online at http://people.csail.mit.edu/
tromer/acoustic/.

[21] Markus G. Kuhn. Electromagnetic eavesdropping
risks of flat-panel displays. In Proc. 4th Workshop
on Privacy Enhancing Technologies (PET 2005),
pages 88–107, 2005.

[34] Steven W. Smith. The Scientist and Engineer’s
Guide to Digital Signal Processing. California
Technical Publishing, 1997.

[22] Markus G. Kuhn. Security limits for compromising
emanations. In Proc. 7th International Workshop of
Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems
(CHES 2005), volume 3659 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 265–279. Springer, 2005.

[35] Peter Smulders. The threat of information theft
by reception of electromagnetic radiation from RS232 cables. Computers & Security, 9:53–58, 1990.

[23] Beth Logan. Mel frequency cepstral coefficients for
music modeling. In Proc. 1st International Conference on Music Information Retrieval, 2000.

[36] Wim van Eck. Electromagnetic radiation from
video display units: An eavesdropping risk? Computers & Security, 4:269–286, 1985.

[24] Beth Logan and Ariel Salomon. A music similarity
function based on signal analysis. In Proc. IEEE
International Conference on Multimedia and Expo.
IEEE Computer Society, 2001.

[37] Andrew J. Viterbi. Error bounds for convolutional
codes and an asymptotically optimum decoding algorithm. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 13(2):260–267, 1967.

[25] Joe Loughry and David A. Umphress. Information
leakage from optical emanation. ACM Transactions
on Information and Systems Security, 5(3):262–
289, 2002.

[38] Wikipedia. Printer (computing) — wikipedia,
the free encyclopedia.
Online at http:
//en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?
title=Printer_(computing)&oldid=
247592038, 2008.

[26] Isoplan :markforschung. Study on the usage of
dot-matrix printers. Available Online at http:
//dot-matrix-survey.webs.com/, 2009.

[39] Peter Wright. Spy Catcher: The Candid Autobiography of a Senior Intelligence Officer. Viking
Adult, 1987.

[27] Meinard Müller. Information Retrieval for Music
and Motion. Springer, 2007.
[28] Meinard Müller, Frank Kurth, and Michael
Clausen. Audio matching via chroma-based statistical features. In Proc. 6th International Conference on Music Information Retrieval, pages 288–
295, 2005.

[40] Kisun You, Jike Chong, Youngmin Yi, Ekaterina
Gonina, Christopher Hughes, Yen-Kuang Chen,
Wonyong Sung, and Kurt Keutzer. Scalable HMM
based inference engine in large vocabulary continuous speech recognition. IEEE Signal Processing
Magazine, 2010.

[29] R. Nag, Kin Hong Wong, and Frank Fallside. Script
recognition using Hidden Markov Models. In Proc.
International Conference on Acoustic Speech and
Signal Processing, pages 2071–2074. IEEE Computer Society, 1986.

[41] John Young. How old is tempest? Online response
collection. Online at http://cryptome.org/
tempest-old.htm, February 2000.
14

[42] Li Zhuang, Feng Zhou, and J. Doug Tygar. Keyboard acoustic emanations revisited. In Proc. 12th
ACM Conference on Computer and Communication Security (CCS 2005), pages 373–382. ACM
Press, 2005.

A

served de = document source.
name printers, commonly known
go network printers; have built-in
network interfaces (typically
wireless As Ethernet), god way
serve As = hardcopy device for out
year we who network. Individual
Printers use often designed 30
support born local god network
connected users go too name time.

Example Text Recognition with
General-purpose HMM Post-processing

In the following we give an excerpt of the text on printers [38], see Section 4.2, to demonstrate the reconstruction.

A.3 Output of the reconstruction with
general-purpose HMM-based postprocessing

A.1 The original text

Finally, we give the reconstructed output after applying the HMM-based post-processing using a generalpurpose corpus. Recognition rate: 74 %.

First, we give the original text.
In computing, a printer is a
peripheral which produces a hard
copy (permanent human-readable
text and/or graphics) of documents
stored in electronic form, usually
on physical print media such as
paper or transparencies. Many
printers are primarily used
as local peripherals, and are
attached by a printer cable
or, in most newer printers, a
USB cable to a computer which
serves as a document source.
Some printers, commonly known
as network printers, have built-in
network interfaces (typically
wireless or Ethernet), and can
serve as a hardcopy device for any
user on the network. Individual
printers are often designed to
support both local and network
connected users at the same time.

in computing a printer in a
peripheral which produces a hard
body permanent human-readable
text and/or graphics of documents
source in electronic form usually
as physical print media such as
pages or transparencies many
printers are primarily used go
local peripherals end are attached
go a printer could or in most
newer printers a usb cable go
a computer which served de =
document source some printers
commonly known go network printers
have built-in network interfaces
typically wireless as ethernet god
way serve as a hardcopy device for
out year we who network individual
printers use often designed so
support born local god network
connected users as too some tree

A.2 Output of the reconstruction without
HMM-based post-processing

B Example Text Recognition with Domainspecific HMM Post-processing

Next, we give the reconstructed output without HMMbased post-processing. Recognition rate: 69 %.

In the following we illustrate the recognition of an excerpt of a living-will declaration [13], see Section 4.2, to
illustrate the domain-specific post-processing.

In computing, a printer in 5
peripheral which produces 3 hard
body (permanent human-readable
text and/or graphics) of documents
status in electronic form.
usually 20 physical print media
Such 30 pages or transparencies.
Many Printers are primarily used
go local peripherals, end are
attached go A printer could
or, in most newer printers; =
USB cable go A computer which

B.1

The original text

First, we give the original text.
ADVANCE HEALTH CARE DIRECTIVE
INSTRUCTIONS: This form lets you
give specific instructions about
any aspect of your health care.
Choices are provided for you to
express your wishes regarding

15

express your wishes regarding
the provision withholding or
withdrawal of treatment to keep
you alive as well as the provision
of pain relief space is provided
for you to add to the choices
you have made or for you to david
out any additional wishes move
form also lets you express an
intention to donate your bodily
organs and tissues following your
death lastly this form lets you
designate a physician to have
primary responsibility for your
health care

the provision, withholding,
or withdrawal of treatment to
keep you alive, as well as the
provision of pain relief. Space
is provided for you to add to
the choices you have made or for
you to write out any additional
wishes. This form also lets you
express an intention to donate
your bodily organs and tissues
following your death. Lastly,
this form lets you designate
a physician to have primary
responsibility for your health
care.

B.2

Output of the reconstruction with
general-purpose HMM-based postprocessing

Next, we give the reconstructed output of the generalpurpose HMM-based post-processing. Recognition rate:
68 %.
advance health care directive
instructions only form into you
with consists observations peace
who appear on your health care
choices act provided for due to
century many witness according
one government declaration of
witnesses be competent to been
one alive as well as the provision
of pain primary power to provided
far one of out of now against
the once made of way and we allow
our own experience witness open
form with lets can average as
connected to donate year states
canada and tissues including heat
energy lastly this poor and you
designing b according to food
witness administration has been
health care

B.3

Output of the reconstruction with
domain-specific HMM-based postprocessing

Finally, we give the reconstructed output after applying
the HMM-based post-processing using a domain-specific
corpus. Recognition rate: 95 %.
advance health care directive
instructions move form lets you
give consists instructions about
any aspect of your health care
choices are provided for you to

16

