Don’t Skype & Type!
Acoustic Eavesdropping in Voice-Over-IP
Alberto Compagno

Sapienza University of Rome

compagno@di.uniroma1.it
Daniele Lain

arXiv:1609.09359v2 [cs.CR] 11 Mar 2017

University of Padua

dlain@math.unipd.it
ABSTRACT
Acoustic emanations of computer keyboards represent a serious privacy issue. As demonstrated in prior work, physical
properties of keystroke sounds might reveal what a user is
typing. However, previous attacks assumed relatively strong
adversary models that are not very practical in many realworld settings. Such strong models assume: (i) adversary’s
physical proximity to the victim, (ii) precise profiling of the
victim’s typing style and keyboard, and/or (iii) significant
amount of victim’s typed information (and its corresponding
sounds) available to the adversary.
This paper presents and explores a new keyboard acoustic eavesdropping attack that involves Voice-over-IP (VoIP),
called Skype & Type (S&T), while avoiding prior strong adversary assumptions. This work is motivated by the simple
observation that people often engage in secondary activities
(including typing) while participating in VoIP calls. As expected, VoIP software acquires and faithfully transmits all
sounds, including emanations of pressed keystrokes, which
can include passwords and other sensitive information. We
show that one very popular VoIP software (Skype) conveys
enough audio information to reconstruct the victim’s input
– keystrokes typed on the remote keyboard. Our results
demonstrate that, given some knowledge on the victim’s
typing style and keyboard model, the attacker attains top-5
accuracy of 91.7% in guessing a random key pressed by the
victim.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that S&T is robust to various VoIP issues (e.g., Internet bandwidth fluctuations and
presence of voice over keystrokes), thus confirming feasibility of this attack. Finally, it applies to other popular VoIP
software, such as Google Hangouts.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Electronic devices are some of the most personal objects in
many people’s lives. We use them to store and manage pri-

To appear in ACM Asia Conference on Computer and Communications
Security (ASIACCS) 2017.

Mauro Conti

University of Padua

conti@math.unipd.it
Gene Tsudik

University of California, Irvine

gene.tsudik@uci.edu

vate and sensitive information, such as photos, passwords,
and messages. Protecting such sensitive data by encryption is a common approach to prevent unauthorized access
and disclosure. However, there is no protection if data is
leaked before encryption. In fact, eavesdropping on physical
signals, such as acoustic or electromagnetic emanations, is
one way to recover either: (1) clear-text data before encryption, e.g., during its input or visualization, or (2) encryption
keys, e.g., during data encryption and decryption. Indeed,
the history of eavesdropping on physical signals dates back
to 1943, when a Bell engineer discovered that an oscilloscope
can retrieve the plain-text from electromagnetic emanations
of a Bell Telephone model 131-B2 – a mixing device used by
the US Army to encrypt communications [9].
A common target for physical eavesdropping attacks are
I/O peripherals, such as keyboards, mice, touch-screens and
printers. Examples of prior physical eavesdropping attacks
include: electromagnetic emanations of keyboards [27], videos
of users typing on a keyboard [4] or a touch-screen [25], and
keyboard acoustic emanations [3]. The research community
invested a lot of effort into studying keyboard acoustic emanations and demonstrated that it is a very serious privacy
issue. A successful acoustic side-channel attack allows an adversary to learn what a victim is typing, based on the sound
produced by keystrokes. Typically, sounds are recorded either directly, using microphones [3, 11, 12, 5, 32, 15, 28,
31, 19], or by exploiting various sensors (e.g., accelerometers [18, 30]) to re-construct the same acoustic information.
Once collected, the audio stream is typically analyzed using
techniques, such as supervised [3, 11, 12, 19] and unsupervised [32, 5] machine learning, or triangulation [15, 28, 31].
The final result is a full or partial reconstruction of the victim’s input.
It appears that all previous attacks require a compromised
(i.e., controlled by the adversary) microphone near the victim’s keyboard [3, 11, 12, 19, 5, 15, 28, 31]. We believe
that this requirement limits applicability of such attacks,
thus reducing their real-world feasibility. Although universal
popularity of smartphones might ease placement of a compromised microphone (e.g., the one in the attacker’s smartphone) close to the victim, the adversary still needs to either
physically position and/or control it. Moreover, some previous approaches are even more restrictive, requiring: (i)
lots of training information to cluster [5], thus necessitating
long-term collection of keystroke sounds, or (ii) precise profiling of the victim’s typing style and keyboard [3, 11, 12,
19].

In this paper, we present and explore a new keyboard
acoustic eavesdropping attack that: (1) does not require the
adversary to control a microphone near the victim, and (2)
works with a limited amount of keystroke data. We call it
Skype & Type attack, or S&T attack for short1 . As a basis for this attack, we exploit Voice-over-IP (VoIP), one of
the most popular and pervasive voice communication technologies used by great multitudes of people throughout the
world. We premise our work on a very simple observation
and a hypothesis:
People involved in VoIP calls often engage in secondary
activities, such as: writing email, contributing their“wisdom”to social networks, reading news, watching videos,
and even writing research papers. Many of these activities involve using the keyboard (e.g., entering a password). VoIP software automatically acquires all acoustic
emanations, including those of the keyboard, and transmits them to all other parties involved in the call. If one
of these parties is malicious, it can determine what the
user typed based on keystroke sounds.

We believe this work is both timely and important, especially, due to growing pervasiveness of VoIP software2 .
Thus, remote keyboard acoustic eavesdropping attacks, if
shown to be realistic, should concern every VoIP user. Prior
studies [3, 11, 12, 19, 5, 15, 28, 31] have not considered either
the setting of our attack, or the features of VoIP software. In
particular, VoIP software performs a number of transformations on the sound before transmitting it over the Internet,
e.g., downsample, approximation, compression, and disruption of the stereo information by mixing the sound into a
single channel. Such transformations have not been considered in the past. In fact, for some prior results, these
transformations conflict with the assumptions, e.g., [15, 28,
31] require stereo information for the recorded audio stream.
Therefore, conclusions from these results are largely inapplicable to S&T attack.
Expected Contributions:
• We demonstrate S&T attack based on (remote) keyboard acoustic eavesdropping over VoIP software, with
the goal of recovering text typed by the user during a
VoIP call with the attacker. S&T attack can also recover random text, such as randomly generated passwords or PINs. We take advantage of spectral features
of keystroke sounds and analyze them using supervised
machine learning algorithms.
• We evaluate S&T attack over a very popular VoIP software: Skype. We designed a set of attack scenarios that we consider to be more realistic than those
used in prior results on keyboard acoustic eavesdropping. We show that S&T attack is highly accurate
with minimal profiling of the victim’s typing style and
keyboard. It remains quite accurate even if neither
profiling is available to the adversary. Our results
show that S&T attack is very feasible, and applicable to real-world settings under realistic assumptions.
It allows the adversary to recover, with high accuracy,
typed (English) text, and to greatly speed up bruteforce cracking of random passwords. Moreover, pre1
For more information and source code, please visit the
project webpage: http://spritz.math.unipd.it/projects/dst/
2
In 2016, Skype reached 300 million active monthly
users [20].

liminary experiments with Google Hangouts indicate
that it is likely susceptible to S&T attack as well.
• We show, via extensive experiments, that S&T attack
is robust to VoIP-related issues, such as limited available bandwidth that degrades call quality, as well as
human speech over keystroke sounds.
• Based on the insights from the design and evaluation
phases of this work, we propose some tentative countermeasures to S&T and similar attacks that exploit
spectral properties of keystroke sounds.
Organization. Section 2 overviews related literature and
state-of-the-art on keyboard eavesdropping. Next, Section 3
describes the system model for our attack and various attack
scenarios. Section 4, presents S&T attack. Then, Section 5
evaluates S&T attack, discusses our results, the impact of
VoIP-specific issues, and exhibits practical applications of
S&T attack. Finally, Section 6 proposes some potential
countermeasures, Section 7 summarizes the paper and Section 8 overviews future work.

2.

RELATED WORK

Eavesdropping on keyboard input is an active and popular area of research. This section begins by overviewing
attacks that rely strictly on acoustic emanations to recover
the victim’s typed text and then summarizes results that
study eavesdropping on other emanations, such as the WiFi
signal, and surface vibrations.
However, there appears to be no prior research literature
on taking advantage of acoustic emanations over the network, particularly over the Internet, to reconstruct keyboard
input — which is instead the contribution of our work.
Attacks Using Sound Emanations. Research on keyboard acoustic eavesdropping started with the seminal paper of Asonov and Agrawal [3] who showed that, by training
a neural network on a specific keyboard, good performance
can be achieved in eavesdropping on the input to the same
keyboard, or keyboards of the same model. This work also
investigated the reasons for this attack and discovered that
the plate beneath the keyboard (where the keys hit the sensors) has a drum-like behavior. This causes the sound produced by different keys to be slightly distinct. Subsequent
efforts can be divided based on whether they use statistical
properties of the sound spectrum or timing information.
Approaches that use statistical properties of the spectrum
typically apply machine learning, both supervised [3, 11, 12,
19] and unsupervised [5, 32] versions.
Supervised learning techniques require many labeled samples and are highly dependent on: (1) the specific keyboard
used for training [3], and (2) the typing style [11, 12]. Such
techniques use Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) coefficients
and neural networks to recover text that can also be random.
Overall, supervised learning approaches yield very high accuracy. However, this comes at the price of strong assumptions on how the data is collected: obtaining labeled samples
of the acoustic emanations of the victim on his keyboard can
be difficult or unrealistic.
Unsupervised learning approaches can cluster together keys
from sounds, or generate sets of constraints between different
key-presses. It is feasible to cluster key sounds and assign
labels to the clusters by using relative letter frequency of
the input language [32]. It is also possible to generate sets
of constraints from recorded sounds and select words from

a dictionary that match these constraints [5]. Unsupervised
learning techniques have the advantage that they do not
require ground truth. However, they make strong assumptions on user input, such as obtaining many samples, i.e.,
emanations corresponding to a long text [32], or requiring
the targets to be dictionary words [5]. They are less effective
when keyboard input is random.
An alternative approach involves analyzing timing information. One convenient way to exploit timing information
is using multiple microphones, such as the ones on mobile
phones [15, 28, 31], and analyze the Time Difference of Arrival (TDoA) information to triangulate the position of the
pressed key. Such techniques differ mostly in whether they
require a training phase [28], and rely on one [15] or more [31]
mobile phones.
Attacks Using Other Emanations. Another body of
work focused on keyboard eavesdropping via non-acoustic
side-channels.
Typing on a keyboard causes its electrical components to
emit electromagnetic waves, and it is possible to collect such
waves, to recover the original keystrokes [27]. Furthermore,
typing causes vibrations of the surface under the keyboard.
These vibrations can be collected by an accelerometer (e.g.,
of a smartphone) and analyzed to determine pressed keys [18].
Analyzing movements of the user’s hands and fingers on a
keyboard represents another way of recovering input. This
is possible by video-recording a typing user [4] or by using
WiFi signal fluctuation on the user’s laptop [2].

3.

SYSTEM AND THREAT MODELS

To identify precise attack scenarios, we begin by defining the system model that serves as the base for S&T. Section 3.1 describes our assumptions about the victim and the
attacker, and then carefully defines the problem of remote
keyboard acoustic eavesdropping. Section 3.2 then presents
some realistic attack scenarios and discusses them in relation
to the state-of-the-art.

3.1

System Model

The system model is depicted in Figure 1. We assume
that the victim has a desktop or a laptop computer with a
built-in or attached keyboard, i.e., not a smartphone or a
tablet-like device. Hereafter, it is referred to as target-device.
A genuine copy of some VoIP software is assumed to be
installed on target-device; this software is not compromised
in any way. Also, target-device is connected to the Internet
and engaged in a VoIP call with at least one party who plays
the role of the attacker.

Internet

Attack-device connection Target-device

Attacker

Victim
Figure 1: System model.

The attacker is a malicious user who aims to learn some
private information about the victim. The attacker owns
and fully controls a computer that we refer to as attack-device,
which has a genuine (unmodified) version of the same VoIP
software as target-device. The attacker uses attack-device to

receive and record the victim’s acoustic emanations using
VoIP software. We assume that the attacker relies solely
on information provided by VoIP software. In other words,
during the attack, the attacker receives no additional acoustic information from the victim, besides what VoIP software
transmits to attack-device.

3.2

Threat Model

S&T attack transpires as follows: during a VoIP call between the victim and the attacker, the former types something on target-device, e.g., a text of an email message or a
password. We refer to this typed information as target-text.
Typing target-text causes acoustic emanations from targetdevice’s keyboard, which are picked up by the target-device’s
microphone and faithfully transmitted to attack-device by
VoIP. The goal of the attacker is to learn target-text by taking
advantage of these emanations.
We make the following assumptions:
• As mentioned above, the attacker has no real-time
audio-related information beyond that provided by VoIP
software. Acoustic information can be degraded by
VoIP software by downsampling and mixing. In particular, without loss of generality, we assume that audio
is converted into a single (mono) signal, as is actually
the case with some VoIP software, such as Skype and
Google Hangouts.
• If the victim discloses some keyboard acoustic emanations together with the corresponding plaintext – the
actual pressed keys (called ground truth) — the volume of this information is small, on the order of a chat
message or a short e-mail. We expect it to be no more
than a few hundred characters.
• target-text is very short (e.g., ≈ 10 characters) and random, corresponding to an ideal password. This keeps
S&T attack as general as possible, since dictionary
words are a “special” case of random words, where optimization may be possible.
We now consider some realistic S&T attack scenarios. We
describe them starting with the more generous setting where
the attacker knows the victim’s typing style and keyboard
model, proceeding to the more challenging one where the
attacker has neither type of information.
1) Complete Profiling: In this scenario, the attacker
knows some of the victim’s keyboard acoustic emanations on
target-device, along with the ground truth for these emanations. This might happen if the victim unwittingly provides
some text samples to the attacker during the VoIP call, e.g.,
sends chat messages, edits a shared document, or sends an
email message3 . We refer to such disclosed emanations as
“labeled data”. To be realistic, the amount of labeled data
should be limited to a few samples for each character.
We refer to this as Complete Profiling scenario, since the
attacker has maximum information about the victim. It corresponds to attack scenarios used in prior supervised learning approaches [3, 11, 12, 19], with the difference that we
collect acoustic emanations using VoIP software, while others collect emanations directly from microphones that are
physically near target-device.
3
Ground truth could also be collected offline, if the attacker
happened to be near the victim, at some point before or
after the actual attack. Note that this still does not require
physical proximity between the attacker and the victim in
real time.

2) User Profiling: In this scenario, we assume that
the attacker does not have any labeled data from the victim
on target-device. However, the attacker can collect training
data of the victim while the victim is using the same type of
device (including the keyboard) as target-device4 . This can be
achieved via social engineering techniques or with the help
of an accomplice. We refer to this as User Profiling scenario,
since, unable to profile target-device, the attacker profiles the
victim’s typing style on the same device type.
3) Model Profiling: This is the most challenging, though
the most realistic, scenario. The attacker has absolutely no
training data for the victim.The attacker and the victim are
engaged in a VoIP call and information that the attacker
obtains is limited to victim keyboard’s acoustic emanations.
The attacker’s initial goal is to determine what laptop
the victim is using. To do so, we assume that the attacker
maintains a database of sounds from previous attacks. If the
attacker already profiled the model of the current victim’s
target-device, it can use this information to mount the attack.
We refer to this as Model Profiling scenario, since although
the attacker can not profile the current victim, it can still
profile a device of the same model as target-device.

4.

SKYPE & TYPE ATTACK

This section provides a detailed description of S&T attack.
Recall that all envisaged scenarios involve the attacker engaged in a VoIP call with the victim. During the call, the
victim types something on target-device’s keyboard. S&T attack proceeds as described below and illustrated in Figure 2.

2. Data classification phase includes target-device classification and key classification steps. Their execution
depends on the specific attack scenario:
– In Complete Profiling and User Profiling scenarios, the attacker already profiled the victim, either on
target-device (Complete Profiling) or on a device of the
same model (User Profiling). The attacker uses this
data as a training set, and proceeds to classify targettext. This case is indicated in Figure 2 by the path
where key classification follows feature extraction.
– In Model Profiling scenario, since the attacker has no
knowledge of the victim’s typing style or target-device,
it begins by trying to identify target-device by classifying its keyboard sounds. The attacker then proceeds
to classify target-text by using correct training data.
This case is indicated in Figure 2 by the path where
target-device classification is the next step after feature
extraction.
Next, we describe these two phases in more detail.

4.1

Data Processing Phase

The main goal in this phase is to extract meaningful features from acoustic information. The first step is data segmentation needed to isolate distinct keystroke sounds within
the recording. Subsequently, using these sound samples, we
build derived values (called features) that represent properties of acoustic information. This step is commonly referred
to as feature extraction.

4.1.1

Data Segmentation

We perform data segmentation according to the following
observation: the waveform of a keystroke sound presents
two distinct peaks, shown in Figure 3. These two peaks
correspond to the events of: (1) the finger pressing the key
– press peak, and (2) the finger releasing the key – release
peak. Similar to [3], we only use the press peak to segment
the data and ignore the release peak. This is because the
former is generally louder than the latter and is thus easier
to isolate, even in very noisy scenarios.
0.4

Press peak

0.2

Figure 2: S&T attack steps.
First, the attacker receives and records acoustic emanations of target-device’s keyboard over VoIP. One way to do so
is by channeling VoIP output to some local recording software. Then, the actual attack involves two phases: (i) data
processing, and (ii) data classification. Each phase involves
two steps:
1. Data processing includes data segmentation and feature extraction steps. They are performed in each of
the three attack scenarios defined in Section 3.
4
In case the target-device is a desktop, knowing the model of
the desktop does not necessarily mean knowing the type of
the keyboard. However, in mixed video/audio call the keyboard model might be visually determined, when the keyboard is placed in the visual range of the camera.

Amplitude

Release peak

0.0

-0.2

-0.4
0

9000
Samples

18000

Figure 3: Waveform of the “A” key, recorded on an
Apple Macbook Pro 13” laptop.
To perform automatic isolation of keystrokes, we set up
a detection mechanism as follows: we first normalize the
amplitude of the signal to have root mean square of 1. We

then sum up the FFT coefficients over small windows of
10ms, to obtain the energy of each window. We detect a
press event when the energy of a window is above a certain
threshold, which is a tunable parameter. We then extract
the subsequent 100ms [5, 32] as the waveform of a given
keystroke event. If sounds of pressed keys are very closely
spaced, it is possible to extract a shorter waveform.

Using a Logistic Regression classifier we classified
a dataset with 10 samples for each of the 26 keys
corresponding to the letters of the English alphabet, in a 10-fold cross-validation scheme. We
then evaluated the accuracy of the classifier with
various spectral features: FFT coefficients, cepstral coefficients, and MFCC.
We repeated this experiment with data from five users on
a Macbook Pro laptop. Accuracy results were: 90.61% (±
3.55%) for MFCC, 86.30% (± 6.34%) for FFT coefficients,
and 51% (± 18.15%) for cepstral coefficients. This shows
that MFCC offers the best features. For MFCC experiments
we used parameters similar to those in [32]: a sliding window
of 10ms with a step size of 2.5ms, 32 filters in the mel scale
filterbank, and used the first 32 MFCC.

4.2

We start with a number of samples s ∈ S, each
represented by its feature vector ~s, and generated
by the same target-device l of model ˜
l, among a
set L of known target-device models. We want
to know which target-device model generated the
samples in S, by classifying every sample s, and
then taking the mode of these predictions.

Feature Extraction

As features, we extract the mel-frequency cepstral coefficients (MFCC) [16]. These features capture statistical properties of the sound spectrum, which is the only information
that we can use. Indeed, due to the mono acoustic information, it is impossible to set up an attack that requires stereo
audio and uses TDoA, such as [15, 28, 31]. Among possible statistical properties of the sound spectrum – including:
MFCC, FFT coefficients, and cepstral coefficients – we chose
MFCC which yielded the best results. To select the most
suitable property, we ran the following experiment:

Classification Phase

In this phase, we apply a machine learning algorithm to
features extracted in the Data Processing phase, in order to
perform:
• Target-device classification using all keystroke sound emanations that the attacker received.
• Key classification of each single keyboard key of targetdevice, by using sound emanations of the keystrokes.
Each classification task is performed depending on the scenario. In Complete Profiling and User Profiling scenarios,
the attacker already profiled the victim on target-device, or on
a device of the same model, respectively. Then, the attacker
loads correct training data and performs the key classification task, to understand target-text.
In contrast, in Model Profiling scenario, the attacker first
performs target-device classification task, in order to identify
the model. Next, the attacker loads correct training data,
and proceeds to the key classification task.
The only viable machine learning approach for both the
key and target-device classification tasks is a supervised learning technique. As discussed in Section 3.2, approaches that
require lots of data to cluster, such as [5], are incompatible
with our assumptions, because we might have only a small
amount of both training and testing data. Moreover, potential randomness of target-text makes it impossible to realize
constraint-based approaches, which would require target-text
to be a meaningful word, as in [32].

Target-device Classification

We consider the task of target-device classification as a multiclass classification problem, where different classes correspond to different target-device models known to the attacker.
More formally, we define the problem as follows:

To perform this classification task, we use a k-nearest neighbors (k-NN) classifier with k = 10 neighbors, that outperformed other classifiers such as Random Forest and Logistic
Regression in our preliminary experiments.

4.2.2

Key Classification

We consider key classification to be a multiclass classification problem, where different classes correspond to different
keyboard keys. To evaluate the classifier’s quality we use
accuracy and top-n accuracy measures. Given true values
of k, accuracy is defined in the multiclass classification case
as the fraction of correctly classified samples over all samples. Top-n accuracy is defined similarly. The sample is
correctly classified if it is present among the top n guesses
of the classifier.
To perform key classification, we use a Logistic Regression
(LR) classifier, since it outperformed all others, including:
Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), Support Vector Machines (SVM), Random Forest (RF), and k-nearest neighbors. We show this in an experiment which uses each candidate to classify a dataset of 10 samples, for each of the
26 keys corresponding to the letters of the English alphabet, in a 10-fold cross-validation scenario. We use MFCC
as features, and, for each classifier, we optimize the hyperparameters with an extensive grid search.
Results are shown in Figure 4 which demonstrates that
the best performing classifiers are LR and SVM. This is
especially the case if the classifier is allowed to make a small
number of predictions (between 1 and 5), which is more
realistic in an eavesdropping setting. In particular, both
LR and SVM exhibit around 90% top-1 accuracy, and over
98.9% top-5 accuracy. However, LR slightly outperforms
SVM until top-4.
LR

LDA

SVM

RF

k-NN

100%
Accuracy

4.1.2

4.2.1

80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
0

2

4
6
8
Number of guesses

10

Figure 4: Average top-n accuracy of single key classification, as a function of the number of guesses, for
each classifier.

EVALUATION

To assess feasibility of S&T attack we conducted a set of
experiments that cover all previously described scenarios.
We chose Skype as the underlying VoIP software. There
are three reasons for this choice: (i) Skype is one of the
most popular VoIP tools [20, 1, 22]; (ii) its codecs are used
in Opus, an IETF standard [26], employed in many other
VoIP applications, such as Google Hangouts and Teamspeak [21]; (iii) it reflects our general assumption about mono
audio. Therefore, we believe Skype is representative of a
wide range of VoIP software packages and its world-wide
popularity makes it appealing for attackers. Even though
our S&T evaluation is focused on Skype, preliminary results
show that we could obtain similar results with other VoIP
software, such as Google Hangouts.
We first describe experimental data collection in Section 5.1.
Then, we discuss experimental results in Section 5.2. Next,
Section 5.3) considers several issues in using VoIP and Skype
to perform S&T attack, e.g., impact of bandwidth reduction
on audio quality, and the likelihood of keystroke sounds overlapping with the victim’s voice. Finally, in Section 5.4, we
report on S&T attack results in the context of two practical scenarios: understanding English words, and improving
brute-force cracking of random passwords.

5.1

Data Collection

We collected data from five distinct users. For each user,
the task was to press the keys corresponding to the English
alphabet, sequentially from “A” to “Z”, and to repeat the
sequence ten times, first by only using the right index finger
(this is known as Hunt and Peck typing, referred to as HP
from here on), and then by using all fingers of both hands
(Touch typing) [12]. We believe that typing letters in the order of the English alphabet rather than, for example, typing
English words, did not introduce bias. Typing the English
alphabet in order is similar to typing random text, that S&T
attack targets. Moreover, a fast touch typist usually takes
around 80ms to type consecutive letters [7], and S&T attack
works without any accuracy loss with samples shorter than
this interval. In order to test correctness of this assumption,
we ran a preliminary experiment as follows:
We recorded keystroke audio of a single user on
a Macbook Pro laptop typing the English alphabet sequentially from “A” to “Z” via Touch typing. We then extracted the waveforms of the letters, as described in Section 4.1. However, instead of extracting 100ms of the waveform, we
extracted 3ms [3], and from 10ms to 100ms at intervals of 10ms for each step. We then extracted
MFCC and tested S&T attack in a 10-fold crossvalidation scheme. Figure 5 shows top-5 accuracy of this preliminary experiment, for different
lengths of the sound sample that we extracted.
We observe that, even with very short 20ms samples, S&T
attack suffers minimal accuracy loss. Therefore, we believe
that adjacent letters do not influence each other, since sound
overlapping is very unlikely to occur.
Note that collecting only the sounds corresponding to letter keys, instead of those for the entire keyboard, does not affect our experiment. The “acoustic fingerprint” of every key
is related to its position on the keyboard plate [3]. Therefore, all keys behave, and are detectable, in the same way [3].

100
Top-5 Accuracy

5.

80
60
40
20
0

3

10

20

30 40 50 60 70
Sample Lenght (ms)

80

100

Figure 5: Top-5 accuracy of single key classification
for different sample lengths.

Due to this property, we believe that considering only letters is sufficient to prove our point. Moreover, because of
this property, it would be trivial to extend our approach to
various keyboard layouts, by associating the keystroke sound
with the position of the key, rather than the symbol of the
key, and then mapping the positions to different keyboard
layouts.
Every user ran the experiment on six laptops: (1) two Apple Macbooks Pro 13” mid 2014, (2) two Lenovo Thinkpads
E540, and (3) two Toshiba Tecras M2. We selected these as
being representative of many common modern laptop models: Macbook Pro is a very popular aluminium-case high-end
laptop, Lenovo Thinkpad E540 is a 15” mid-priced laptop,
and Toshiba Tecra M2 is an older laptop model, manufactured in 2004. All acoustic emanations of the laptop keyboards were recorded by the microphone of the laptop in
use, with Audacity software v2.0.0. We recorded all data
with a sampling frequency of 44.1kHz, and then saved it in
WAV format, 32-bit PCM signed.
We then filtered the results by routing the recorded emanations through the Skype software, and recording the received emanations on a different computer (i.e., on the attacker’s side). To do so, we used two machines running
Linux, with Skype v4.3.0.37, connected to a high-speed network. During the calls, there was no sensible data loss. We
analyzed bandwidth requirements needed for data loss to occur, and the impact of bandwidth reduction, in Section 5.3.1.
At the end of data collection and processing phases, we
obtained datasets for all the five users on all six laptops,
with both the HP and Touch-typing styles. All datasets are
both unfiltered, i.e., raw recordings from the laptop’s microphone, and filtered through Skype and recorded on the
attacker’s machine. Each dataset consists of 260 samples,
10 for each of the 26 letters of the English alphabet. The
number of users and of laptops we considered often exceeds
related work on the topic [3, 11, 12, 19], where only a maximum of 3 keyboards were tested, and a single test user.

5.2

S&T Attack Evaluation

We evaluated S&T attack with all scenarios described in
Section 3.2. We evaluated Complete Profiling scenario in
detail, by analyzing performance of S&T attack separately
for all three laptop models, two different typing styles, and
VoIP filtered and unfiltered data. We consider this to be
a favorable scenario for showing the accuracy of S&T attack. In particular, we evaluated performance by considering VoIP transformation, and various combinations of lap-

tops and typing styles. We then analyzed only the realistic
combination of Touch typing data, filtered with Skype.
We evaluated S&T attack accuracy in recognizing single
characters, according to the top-n accuracy, defined in [6],
as mentioned in Section 4.2.2. As a baseline, we considered
a random guess with accuracy xl , where x is the number
of guesses, and l is the size of the alphabet. Therefore, in
our experimental setup, accuracy of the random guess is
x
, since we considered 26 letters of the English alphabet.
26
Because of the need to eavesdrop on random text, we can
not use “smarter” random guesses that, for example, take
into account letter frequencies in a given language.

5.2.1

Complete Profiling Scenario

To evaluate the scenario where the victim disclosed some
labeled data to the attacker, we proceeded as follows. We
considered all datasets, one at a time, each consisting of 260
samples (10 for every letter), in a stratified 10-fold crossvalidation scheme5 . For every fold, we performed feature
selection on training data using a Recursive Feature Elimination algorithm [10]. We calculated the classifier’s accuracy
over each fold, and then computed the mean and standard
deviation of accuracy values.
Figure 6 depicts results of the experiment on the realistic
Touch typing, Skype-filtered data combination. We observe
that S&T attack achieves its lowest performance on Lenovo
laptops with top-1 accuracy of 59.8%, and a top-5 accuracy
83.5%. On Macbook Pro and Toshiba, we obtained a very
high top-1 accuracy, 83.23% and 73.3% respectively, and a
top-5 accuracy of 97.1% and 94.5%, respectively. We believe
that these differences are due to variable quality of manufacturing, e.g., the keyboard of our particular Lenovo laptop
model is made of cheap plastic materials.
Random guess

Macbook Pro

Toshiba

Lenovo

5.2.2

A More Realistic Small Training Set

As discussed in Section 3.2, one way to mount S&T attack in the Complete Profiling scenario is by exploiting data
accidentally disclosed by the victim, e.g., via Skype instantmessaging with the attacker during the call. However, each
dataset we collected includes 10 repetitions of every letter,
from “A” to “Z”, 260 total. Though this is a reasonably low
amount, it has unrealistic letter frequencies. We therefore
trained the classifier with a small subset of training data that
conforms to the letter frequency of the English language. To
do this, we retained 10 samples of the most frequent letters
according to the Oxford Dictionary [23]. Then, we randomly
excluded samples of less frequent letters until only one sample for the least frequent letters was available. Ultimately,
the subset contained 105 samples, that might correspond to
a typical short chat message or a brief email. We then evaluated performance of the classifier trained with this subset,
on a 10-fold cross-validation scheme. This random exclusion scheme was repeated 20 times for every fold. Results
on Touch typing Skype filtered data are shown in Figure 7.

80%

Random guess

60%

100%

40%

80%

20%
0%
0

2

4
6
8
Number of guesses

10

Figure 6: S&T attack performance – Complete Profiling scenario, Touch typing, Skype-filtered data,
average accuracy.
Interestingly, we found that there is little difference between this data combination (that we consider the most unfavorable) and the others. In particular, we compared average accuracy of S&T attack on HP and Touch typing data,
and found that the average difference in accuracy is 0.80%.
Moreover, we compared the results of unfiltered data with
Skype filtered data, and found that the average difference
5
In a stratified k-fold cross-validation scheme, the dataset
is split in k sub-samples of equal size, each having the
same percentage of samples for every class as the complete
dataset. One sub-sample is used as testing data, and the
other (k − 1) – as training data. The process is repeated k
times, using each of the sub-samples as testing data.

Accuracy

Accuracy

100%

in accuracy is a surprising 0.33%. This clearly shows that
Skype does not reduce accuracy of S&T attack.
We also ran a smaller set of these experiments over Google
Hangouts and observed the same tendency. This means that
the keyboard acoustic eavesdropping attack is applicable to
other VoIP software, not only Skype. It also makes this
attack more credible as a real threat. We report these results
in more detail in Appendix A.
From now on, we only focus on the most realistic combination – Touch typing and Skype filtered data. We consider
this combination to be the most realistic, because S&T attack is conducted over Skype, and it is more common for
users to type with the Touch typing style, rather than the
HP typing style. We limit ourself to this combination to
further understand real-world performance of S&T attack.

Macbook Pro

Lenovo

Toshiba

60%
40%
20%
0%
0

2

4
6
8
Number of guesses

10

Figure 7: S&T attack performance – Complete Profiling scenario, average accuracy, on a small subset
of 105 samples that respects the letter frequency of
the English language.
We incurred an accuracy loss of around 30% on every laptop, mainly because the (less frequent) letters for which we
have only a few examples in the training set are harder to
classify. However, performance of the classifier is still good
enough, even with such a very small training set, composed
of 105 samples with realistic letter frequency. This further
motivates the Complete Profiling scenario: the attacker can
exploit even a few acoustic emanations that the victim discloses via a short message during a Skype call.

5.2.3

User Profiling Scenario

In this case, the attacker profiles the victim on a laptop of
the same model of target-device. We selected the dataset of a
particular user on one of the six laptops, and used it as our
training set. Recall that it includes 260 samples, 10 for every
letter. This training set modeled data that the attacker
acquired, e.g., via social engineering techniques. We used
the dataset of the same user on the other laptop of the same
type, to model target-device. We conducted this experiment
for all six laptops.
Random guess

Macbook Pro

Toshiba

Lenovo

Accuracy

100%
80%

Key classification. Once the attacker learns target-device,
it proceeds to determine keyboard input. However, it does
not have any extra information about the victim that can
be used to train the classifier. Nonetheless, the attacker can
use, as a training set, data obtained from another user on a
laptop of the same model as target-device.

60%
40%
20%
0%
0

We now consider the case when the model of target-device is
not in the database. The attacker must first determine that
this is indeed so. This can be done using the confidence of
the classifier. If target-device is in the database, most samples
are classified correctly, i.e., they “vote”correctly. However,
when target-device is not in the database, predicted labels for
the samples are spread among known models. One way to
assess whether this is the case is to calculate the difference
between the mean and the most-voted labels. We observed
that trying to classify an unknown laptop consistently leads
to a lower value of this metric: 0.21 vs 0.45. The attacker can
use such observations, and then attempt to obtain further information via social engineering techniques, e.g., laptop [13],
microphone [8] or webcam [17] fingerprinting.

2

4
6
8
Number of guesses

10
Random guess

5.2.4

Model Profiling Scenario

We now evaluate the most unfavorable and the most realistic scenario where the attacker does not know anything
about the victim. Conducting S&T attack in this scenario
requires: (i) target-device classification, followed by (ii) key
classification.
Target-device classification. The first step for the attacker is to determine whether target-device is a known model.
We assume that the attacker collected a database of acoustic
emanations from many keyboards.
When acoustic emanations from target-device are received,
if the model of target-device is present in the database, the
attacker can use this data to train the classifier. To evaluate
this scenario, we completely excluded all records of one user
and of one specific laptop of the original dataset. We did this
to create a training set where both the victim’s typing style
and the victim’s target-device are unknown to the attacker.
We also added, to the training set, several devices, including
3 keyboards: Apple Pro, Logitech Internet, Logitech Y, as
well as 2 laptops: Acer E15 and Sony Vaio Pro 2013.
We did this to show that a laptop is recognizable from its
keyboard acoustic emanations among many different models. We evaluated the accuracy of k-NN classifier in idenitifying the correct laptop model, on the Touch typing and
Skype filtered data combination. Results show quite high
accuracy of 93%. This experiment confirms that an attacker
can determine the victim’s device, by using acoustic emanations.

Toshiba

Lenovo

100%
Accuracy

Figure 8: S&T attack performance – User Profiling
scenario, average accuracy.
Results reflected in Figure 8 show that top-1 accuracy decreases to as low as 14% on Toshiba and Lenovo laptops, and
to 19% on Macbook Pro. However, top-5 accuracy grows
to 41.9%, 54%, and 45.6% on Lenovo, Macbook Pro, and
Toshiba, respectively. This shows the utility of social engineering techniques used to obtain labeled data of the victim,
even on a different laptop.

Macbook Pro

80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
0

2

4
6
8
Number of guesses

10

Figure 9: S&T attack performance – Model Profiling
scenario, average accuracy.
Results of S&T attack in this scenario are shown in Figure 9. As expected, accuracy decreases with respect to previous scenarios. However, especially with Macbook Pro and
Toshiba datasets, we still have an appreciable advantage
from a random guess baseline. In particular, top-1 accuracy
goes from a 178% improvement from the baseline random
guess on Lenovo datasets, to a 312% improvement on Macbook Pro datasets. Top-5 accuracy goes from a 152% on
Lenovo to a 213% on Macbook Pro.
To further improve these results, the attacker can use an
alternative strategy to build the training set. Suppose that
the attacker recorded multiple users on a laptop of the same
model of the target-device and then combines them to form a
“crowd” training set. We evaluated this scenario as follows:
We selected the dataset of one user on a given laptop, as
a test set. We then created the training set by combining
the data of other users of the same laptop model. We repeated this experiment, selecting every combination of user
and laptop as a test set, and the corresponding other users
and laptop as a training set. Results reported in Figure 10
show that overall accuracy grows by 6-10%, meaning that
this technique further improves classifier’s detection rate.
In particular, this increase in accuracy, from 185% to 412%
(with respect to a baseline random guess) yields a greater
improvement than the approach with a single user on the
training set.

Random guess

Macbook Pro

Lenovo

Toshiba

Accuracy

100%
80%
60%

we find the Skype software is able to operate. We then evaluated both the accuracy of S&T attack, and the quality of
the call by using the voice recognition software CMU Sphinx
v5 [14] on the Harvard Sentences. We show the results in
Figure 11.

40%

Fraction of lost samples

20%
2

4
6
8
Number of guesses

Figure 10: S&T attack performance – Model Profiling scenario with “crowd” training data, average
accuracy.

60
40
20
0

Results show that S&T attack is still quite viable in a
realistic VoIP scenario, with a target text which is both short
and random. Moreover, this is possible with little to none
specific training data of the victim, i.e., the attacker might
even have no prior knowledge of the victim.

Speech recognition accuracy
Character recognition accuracy

80

10

Accuracy

0%
0

100

No Limit

60Kbit/s

50Kbit/s

40Kbit/s

Bandwidth Limit

30Kbit/s

20Kbit/s

Figure 11: Voice recognition and S&T attack accuracy, on data acquired through Skype with different
connection bandwidths.

To conclude the experimental evaluation, we further analyze the impact of issues that stem from using VoIP to
perform S&T attack. Using VoIP as the attack medium
poses additional challenges to the attacker, such as possible
presence of speech on top of the keystroke sounds. Also,
we need to investigate to what extent (if any) technical features of the SILK codec [26] degrade performance of S&T
attack. For example, this codec reduces audible bandwidth
whenever available Internet bandwidth is low; this operation
degrades the sound spectrum.
We now analyze the impact of variable Internet bandwidth on S&T attack performance, and the impact of voice
audio overlaying keyboard emanations, i.e., the victim talking while pressing keyboard keys.

From Figure 11, we can see that, while there is no change
to the accuracy of the voice recognition software until the
20 Kbit/s threshold, the classifier suffers a noticeable loss at
and under 40 Kbit/s. This analysis shows that aggressive
downsampling, and communication errors, can greatly hinder the accuracy of the attacker on the eavesdropping task,
and that a loss of the order of 20% is to be expected if the
connection speed is very low. We also observe that, at 20
Kbit/s, even if the Skype call is working, many samples of
both the speech and keyboard sounds are lost or irreparably
damaged due to the small bandwidth, and the final quality of the call might be undesirable for the user. However,
it is realistic to assume Skype to be always working at the
best possible quality or almost at the best possible quality,
since 70-50Kbit/s are bandwidths that are small enough to
be almost guaranteed.

5.3.1

5.3.2

5.3

VoIP-specific Issues

Impact of Fluctuating Bandwidth

In the experimental setup, both VoIP end-points were
connected to a high-speed network. However, a realistic
call might go over slower or more error-prone network links.
Therefore, we performed a number of sample Skype calls
between the two end-points while monitoring network load
of the transmitter (i.e., the one producing emanations).
We experimented as follows: we filtered all data recorded
on one Macbook Pro laptop by all the users with the HP
typing style using Skype, together with a five minutes sample of the Harvard Sentences, commonly used to evaluate the
quality of VoIP applications [24]. We initially let the Skype
software use the full bandwidth available, and we measured
that the software used an average of 70 Kbit/s without any
noticeable packet loss. We subsequently limited the bandwidth of the transmitting machine at 60 Kbit/s, 50 Kbit/s,
40 Kbit/s, 30 Kbit/s, respectively, 20 Kbit/s. We observed
that, with values below 20 Kbit/s, the quality of the call
is compromised, because of frequent disconnections. S&T
attack with such a small bandwidth is therefore not possible, and we argue that real users suffering this degradation
of service would anyway not be willing neither able to continue the Skype call. Therefore, we believe the bandwidths
we selected are representative of all the conditions on which

The Impact Of Voice

In the experiments we described so far, we did not consider that the victim can possibly be talking while he types
the target text. However, in a VoIP call, this can happen
frequently, as it is probable that the victim is talking while
he types something on the keyboard of his target-device. We
evaluated the impact of this scenario as follows: we considered all the data of one user on the Macbook Pro laptop,
consisting of 260 samples, 10 for every class, in a 10-fold
cross-validation scheme. For every fold, we performed feature selection on the train data with a Recursive Feature
Elimination algorithm, and we then overlapped the test data
with a random part of a recording of some Harvard Sentences
with the pauses stripped out (so that the recording always
has some voice in it). To account for the random overlap, we
repeated the process 10 times, to have the keystroke sound
overlap different random phonemes. We then evaluated the
mean and standard deviation of the accuracy of the classifier.
We repeated the described experiment with different relative intensities of the voice against the intensity of the sound
of the keystrokes. We started at -20dB, meaning that the
keystrokes are 20dB louder than the voice of the speaker,
and evaluated progressive steps of 5dB, until we had the

voice of the speaker 20dB louder than the keystrokes. We
performed this scheme on the data for all users on the Macbook Pro laptop, with Touch typing and data filtered with
Skype. We show the results in Figure 12.
One random guess
Five random guesses

100

Top-1 accuracy
Top-5 accuracy

Accuracy

80
60
40
20
0-20dB

-15dB -10dB

-5dB

+0dB

+5dB

+10dB +15dB +20dB

predicted letters. We then calculated the error between the
actual word and the most probable guessed word, i.e., Hamming distance / length of the word. We tested 1000 random
words for each of the datasets. On the Complete Profiling
scenario, we obtain an average error of 9.26% characters for
each word (± 8.25%), that goes down to 2.65% (± 5.90%)
using a simple spell checker, who is able to correct most
of the errors. We find this trend independent of the word
length. On the Model Profiling scenario, we obtain an average error of 60.79% characters (± 9.80%), down to 57.76%
(± 11.50) using spell checking techniques. These results
are indicative of the possible applications of S&T attack,
and can be greatly increased with the use of more powerful spell checking techniques, Natural Language Processing
techniques, and crowd-sourced approaches (e.g., Google Instant).

Voice to keystroke ratio

5.4.2
Figure 12: S&T attack performance – average accuracy, overlap of keystroke sounds and voice, at
different relative intensity.
We observe that, from −20dB until 0dB, S&T attack does
not suffer almost any performance loss, and then the accuracy rapidly decreases, until it reaches the random guess
baseline at +20dB. We explain both the positive and the
negative results with the phenomenon of auditory masking [29], where only the most powerful tone among all the
tones at a given frequency is audible. In our case, the greater
the difference between the intensity of the sound of the
keystroke and of the voice, the more only the frequencies
of the louder sound will be audible. However, it is realistic
to assume that the speaker will talk at a reasonable volume
during the Skype call. Given that the keystrokes are very
loud when recorded from a laptop microphone (sometimes
almost peaking the headroom of the microphone), it is unlikely that the victim will talk more than 5dB louder than a
keystroke sound. These results therefore show that the victim speaking does not prevent the attacker to perform S&T
attack.

5.4

S&T Practical Applications

We now consider two practical applications of the results
of S&T attack: understanding words, and cracking random
passwords. In particular, if the victim is typing English
words, we analyze how S&T can help understanding such
words. If the victim is typing a random password, we show
how S&T attack can greatly reduce the average number of
trials required in order to crack it, via a brute force attack.
In the following, we report the results of these practical applications on the Complete Profiling scenario, and on the
Model Profiling scenario.

5.4.1

Word Recognition

To evaluate how S&T helps understanding the words that
the victim typed, we proceeded as follows. We drew a number of random words from an English dictionary; we call such
words actual words. For each actual word, we reconstructed
its typing sound combining the sound samples of each letter in the actual word. We used the sound sample of the
letters we collected in Section 5.1. We then performed S&T
attack, to obtain the top-5 predictions for each letter of the
actual word, and we created a set of guessed words with the

Password Recognition

Secure passwords that prevent dictionary attacks are random combinations of alphanumeric characters. In order to
understand how S&T attack helps in cracking such random
passwords, we analytically study the speed-up of an improved brute-force scheme that takes advantage of our results. In particular, the scheme is as follows: given the x
guesses of S&T for each of the n characters of the target
password, we first consider all the xn combinations of such
characters. We then assume that the set of x guesses of the
first character was wrong, and subsequently consider all the
other characters. When we finish considering that one set
of guesses was wrong, we consider all the combinations of
two wrong guesses (i.e., first and second sets of guesses were
wrong, first and third sets were wrong, up to the seventh
and eighth sets). We repeat this scheme until we finally
try the combinations where the classifier was always wrong.
This brute-force scheme leverages the probability of success
of S&T to minimize, on average, the required time to crack
a password. If we consider a target password of 10 lowercase characters of the English alphabet, a regular brute-force
10
= 8.39 · 1013 guesses to have
scheme requires requires (26)
2
50% probability. On the Complete Profiling scenario, that
we recall has an average top-5 accuracy of more than 90%,
we only need 9.76 · 106 tries to have 50% probability. This
corresponds to a very high average speedup of 107 , and an
entropy reduction of more than 50%. On the Model Profiling scenario, where we have a top-5 accuracy around 40%,
we need 7.79 · 1012 tries to reach 50% probability of cracking
the password, which is still one order of magnitude better
than plain brute-force attacks, on average. There is similar tendency if the attack guesses ten characters for every
character of the password.

6.

POSSIBLE COUNTERMEASURES

In this section, we present and discuss some potential
countermeasures and analyze their efficacy in preventing
S&T and other attacks that use statistical properties of the
sound spectrum.
One simple countermeasure is a short “ducking” effect, a
technique that drastically lowers microphone volume and
overlaps it with a different sound, whenever a keystroke is
detected. However, this approach can degrade voice call
quality. Ideally, an effective countermeasure should be minimally intrusive and affect only keystroke sounds.

A less intrusive countermeasure that might work against
all techniques that use sound spectrum information, is to
perform short random transformations to the sound whenever a keystroke is detected. One intuitive way to do this
is to apply a random multi-band equalizer over a number
of small frequency bands of the spectrum. This allows us
to modify the intensity of specific frequency ranges, called
“bands”. Each band should be selected at random and its intensity should be modified by a small random amount, thus
effectively changing the sound spectrum. This approach
should allow the speaker’s voice to remain intelligible.
To show the efficacy of this countermeasure, we ran the
following experiment: we considered all data recorded on the
Macbook Pro laptop, one user at a time, in a 10-fold crossvalidation scheme. For every fold, we applied a multiband
equalizer with 100 bands to the test data only, where each
band has a random center between 100 Hz and 3000 Hz, a
very high resonance Q of 50, and a random gain between
-5dB and +5dB. We then tried to classify these samples
using both MFCC and FFT features, in order to see if such
countermeasure are effective even against different spectral
features. Results in Figure 13 show S&T accuracy, with and
without the countermeasure, for MFCC and FFT features.
Random guess
MFCC, countermeasure

MFCC
FFT, countermeasure

FFT

Accuracy

100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
0

2

4
6
8
Number of guesses

10

Figure 13: Average accuracy of single key classification against a random equalization countermeasure.
The proposed countermeasure successfully disrupts FFT
coefficients, such as those used in [3, 11, 12, 19], by reducing
the accuracy of S&T to the baseline random guess. For
MFCC features, although the countermeasure still manages
to reduce the accuracy by 50%, on average, the features
remain partly robust to this tampering.
A more simplistic approach is to use software or emulated
keyboards, i.e., those that appear on the screen and are operated by the mouse. Similarly trivial ideas include: (1)
activating a mute button before typing, or (2) not to type
at all whenever engaged in a VoIP call.

7.

CONCLUSIONS

This paper demonstrated a highly accurate VoIP-based
remote keyboard acoustic eavesdropping attack. We first described a number of practical attack scenarios, using VoIP as
a novel means to acquire acoustic information under realistic assumptions: random target text and very small training
sets, in Section 3. Then, in Section 4 we demonstrated an
attack with these assumptions in mind and carefully selected
the tools to maximize its accuracy. In Section 5, we thoroughly evaluated S&T attack using Skype in several scenarios. Finally, we discussed some potential countermeasures

to S&T and other attacks that leverage spectral features of
keyboard sounds, in Section 6.
We believe that this work, due to its real-world applicability, advances the state-of-the-art in acoustic eavesdropping
attacks. S&T attack was shown to be both feasible and accurate over Skype, in all considered attack scenarios, with
none or minimal profiling of the victim’s typing style and
keyboard. In particular, it is accurate in the Model Profiling
scenario, where the attacker profiles a laptop of the same
model as the victim’s laptop, without any additional information about the victim. This allows the attacker to learn
private information, such as sensitive text or passwords. We
also took into account VoIP-specific issues – such as the impact of audible bandwidth reduction, and effects of human
voice mixed with keystroke audio – and showed that S&T
is robust with respect to both. Finally, we discussed some
countermeasures and concluded that S&T is hard to mitigate.

8.

FUTURE WORK

We believe that our choice of laptops and test users is a
representative sample. The number of tested laptops was in
line with related work, and the number of users was greater.
(In fact, related work was based on collected data of only
one user [3, 11, 12, 19]). However, it would be useful to run
the experiments on more keyboard models (such as external
keyboards with switches) and with more users. This would
offer a more convincing demonstration that S&T works regardless of underlying equipment and typing styles. Another
important direction is analyzing the impact of different microphones to collect both training and test data.
As far as the impact of the actual VoIP software, we focused on Skype – currently the most popular VoIP tool [20,
1, 22]. We consider it to be representative of other VoIP
software, since its codecs are used in Opus (an IETF standard [26]) and employed in many VoIP applications, such as
Google Hangouts and Teamspeak [21]. We believe that other
VoIP software is probably vulnerable to S&T attack. We
also ran some preliminary experiments with Google Hangouts and the results confirm this assertion. However, a more
thorough assessment of other VoIP software is needed.
We also plan to improve the accuracy of S&T attack, especially when target-text is meaningful, (e.g., English text) by
including Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques or
crowd-sourcing approaches. Finaly, we intend to further explore S&T countermeasures, analyze real-time feasibility of
random equalization in the presence of keystroke audio, evaluate its impact on user-perceived call quality, and improve
its performance.

References
[1] 2015: Skype’s year in review. url:
http://blogs.skype.com/2015/12/17/2015-skypesyear-in-review/ (visited on 06/29/2016).
[2] Kamran Ali et al. “Keystroke recognition using WiFi
signals”. In: ACM MobiCom. 2015, pp. 90–102.
[3] Dmitri Asonov and Rakesh Agrawal. “Keyboard
acoustic emanations”. In: IEEE S&P. 2004, pp. 3–11.
[4] Davide Balzarotti, Marco Cova, and Giovanni Vigna.
“Clearshot: Eavesdropping on keyboard input from
video”. In: IEEE S&P. 2008, pp. 170–183.

[5] Yigael Berger, Avishai Wool, and Arie Yeredor.
“Dictionary attacks using keyboard acoustic
emanations”. In: ACM CCS. 2006, pp. 245–254.
[6] Stephen Boyd et al. “Accuracy at the top”. In: NIPS.
2012, pp. 953–961.
[7] Stuart Card, Thomas Moran, and Allen Newell. “The
keystroke-level model for user performance time with
interactive systems”. In: CACM 7 (1980),
pp. 396–410.
[8] Anupam Das, Nikita Borisov, and Matthew Caesar.
“Do you hear what I hear?: fingerprinting smart
devices through embedded acoustic components”. In:
ACM CCS. 2014, pp. 441–452.
[9] Jeffrey Friedman. “Tempest: A signal problem”. In:
NSA Cryptologic Spectrum (1972).

[20] Microsoft BUILD 2016 Keynote. url: https:
//channel9.msdn.com/Events/Build/2016/KEY01
(visited on 06/29/2016).
[21] Opus Codec Support. url:
https://wiki.xiph.org/OpusSupport (visited on
07/19/2016).
[22] Over 1 billion Skype mobile downloads. url:
http://blogs.skype.com/2016/04/28/over-1-billionskype-mobile-downloads-thank-you/ (visited on
06/29/2016).
[23] Oxford Dictionary - Which letters in the alphabet are
used most often. url:
http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/words/whichletters-are-used-most (visited on 06/29/2016).

[10] Isabelle Guyon et al. “Gene selection for cancer
classification using support vector machines”. In:
Machine Learning 1-3 (2002), pp. 389–422.

[24] EH Rothauser et al. “IEEE recommended practice for
speech quality measurements”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Audio and Electroacoustics 3 (1969), pp. 225–246.

[11] Tzipora Halevi and Nitesh Saxena. “A closer look at
keyboard acoustic emanations: random passwords,
typing styles and decoding techniques”. In: ACM
CCS. 2012, pp. 89–90.

[25] Diksha Shukla et al. “Beware, your hands reveal your
secrets!” In: ACM CCS. 2014, pp. 904–917.

[12] Tzipora Halevi and Nitesh Saxena. “Keyboard
acoustic side channel attacks: exploring realistic and
security-sensitive scenarios”. In: International Journal
of Information Security 5 (2015), pp. 443–456.
[13] Tadayoshi Kohno, Andre Broido, and
Kimberly Claffy. “Remote physical device
fingerprinting”. In: IEEE TDSC 2 (2005), pp. 93–108.
[14] Paul Lamere et al. “The CMU SPHINX-4 speech
recognition system”. In: IEEE ICASSP. 2003,
pp. 2–5.
[15] Jian Liu et al. “Snooping keystrokes with mm-level
audio ranging on a single phone”. In: ACM
MobiCom. 2015, pp. 142–154.
[16] Beth Logan et al. “Mel Frequency Cepstral
Coefficients for Music Modeling.” In: ISMIR. 2000.

[26] Jean-Marc Valin, Koen Vos, and T Terriberry.
“Definition of the Opus audio codec”. In: IETF,
September (2012).
[27] Martin Vuagnoux and Sylvain Pasini. “Compromising
Electromagnetic Emanations of Wired and Wireless
Keyboards.” In: USENIX Security. 2009, pp. 1–16.
[28] Junjue Wang et al. “Ubiquitous keyboard for small
mobile devices: harnessing multipath fading for
fine-grained keystroke localization”. In: ACM
MobiSys. 2014, pp. 14–27.
[29] RL Wegel and CE Lane. “The auditory masking of
one pure tone by another and its probable relation to
the dynamics of the inner ear”. In: Physical Review 2
(1924), p. 266.

[17] Jan Lukas, Jessica Fridrich, and Miroslav Goljan.
“Digital camera identification from sensor pattern
noise”. In: IEEE TIFS 2 (2006), pp. 205–214.

[30] Teng Wei et al. “Acoustic eavesdropping through
wireless vibrometry”. In: ACM MobiCom. 2015,
pp. 130–141.

[18] Philip Marquardt et al. “(sp) iPhone: decoding
vibrations from nearby keyboards using mobile phone
accelerometers”. In: ACM CCS. 2011, pp. 551–562.

[31] Tong Zhu et al. “Context-free attacks using keyboard
acoustic emanations”. In: ACM CCS. 2014,
pp. 453–464.

[19] Zdenek Martinasek, Vlastimil Clupek, and
Krisztina Trasy. “Acoustic attack on keyboard using
spectrogram and neural network”. In: TSP. 2015,
pp. 637–641.

[32] Li Zhuang, Feng Zhou, and Doug Tygar. “Keyboard
acoustic emanations revisited”. In: ACM TISSEC 1
(2009), p. 3.

APPENDIX
We now analyze the accuracy of S&T attack in the context
of the Complete Profiling scenario.

A.

FURTHER DATA COMPARISONS

We compare HP and Touch typing data in Figures 14 and
15. Figure 14 shows S&T attack accuracy as a function of
the number of guesses, and Figure 15 highlights top-1 and
top-5 accuracies. We observe that S&T attack is as accurate
with Touch as with HP typing data, within best 4 guesses.
From the 5-th guess onwards, there is a slight advantage
with HP typing data; however, the difference is very small
– around 1.1% in the worst case.

Next, we compare the following data: unfiltered, Skypefiltered and Google Hangouts-filtered in figures 16 and 17.
Figure 16 shows S&T attack accuracy as a function of the
number of guesses, and Figure 17 highlights top-1 and top-5
accuracies. Once again, we observe that there is only a small
difference in the accuracies between unfiltered and Skypefiltered data – around 1%. We see a slightly worse top-1
accuracy with Google Hangouts, with respect to unfiltered
data. This difference of about 5% gets progressively smaller,
and, at top-5, there is no difference between unfiltered and
Google Hangouts-filtered data.
Random guess

Unfiltered data

Skype

Google Hangouts

100%
HP typing

Touch typing

Accuracy

Random guess

Accuracy

100%
80%

80%
60%
40%

60%

20%

40%

0%
0

2

4
6
8
Number of guesses

20%
0%
0

2

4
6
8
Number of guesses

10

10

Figure 16: S&T attack performance – average
accuracy of unfiltered, Skype-filtered and Google
Hangouts-filtered data.

Figure 14: S&T attack performance – average accuracy of HP and Touch typing data.
Plain
HP typing

Touch typing

100
Accuracy

Accuracy

Hangouts

80

80
60
40

60
40
20

20
0

Skype

100

0
Top-1

Guesses

Top-5

Figure 15: S&T attack performance – top-1 and top5 accuracies of HP and Touch typing data.

Top-1

Guesses

Top-5

Figure 17: S&T attack performance – top-1 and top5 accuracies of unfiltered, Skype-filtered and Google
Hangouts-filtered data.

