sensors
Article

Behavioral Acoustic Emanations: Attack and
Verification of PIN Entry Using Keypress Sounds
Sourav Panda 1 , Yuanzhen Liu 2 , Gerhard Petrus Hancke 2, *
1
2
3

*

and Umair Mujtaba Qureshi 2,3

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, USA;
spand009@ucr.edu
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China;
yuanzhliu3-c@my.cityu.edu.hk (Y.L.); umqureshi2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk (U.M.Q.)
Department of Telecommunication Engineering, Mehran University of Engineering and Technology,
Jamshoro 76062, Sindh, Pakistan
Correspondence: gp.hancke@cityu.edu.hk; Tel.: +852-3442-9341

Received: 29 April 2020; Accepted: 22 May 2020; Published: 26 May 2020

Abstract: This paper explores the security vulnerability of Personal Identification Number (PIN) or
numeric passwords. Entry Device (PEDs) that use small strings of data (PINs, keys or passwords) as
means of verifying the legitimacy of a user. Today, PEDs are commonly used by personnel in different
industrial and consumer electronic applications, such as entry at security checkpoints, ATMs and
customer kiosks, etc. In this paper, we propose a side-channel attack on a 4–6 digit random PIN key,
and a PIN key user verification method. The intervals between two keystrokes are extracted from the
acoustic emanation and used as features to train machine-learning models. The attack model has a
60% chance to recover the PIN key. The verification model has an 88% accuracy on identifying the
user. Our attack methods can perform key recovery by using the acoustic side-channel at low cost.
As a countermeasure, our verification method can improve the security of PIN entry devices.
Keywords: side-channel attack; personal identification number; biometric verification; PIN
entry device

1. Introduction
The Internet of Things (IoT) refers to a network of tiny small wireless sensors that communicate
with each other via the Internet [1]. Today, IoT provides a wide range of consumer applications [2]. IoT
devices are resource constrained devices which makes them an attractive target for attacks [3]. To access
different applications and services, user authentication and verification is the first layer of security.
Failing to authentication and verification process leads to denial of service. For example, authentication
and verification processes are commonly used in Automated Teller Machines (ATMs) and Point of
Sale (POS) terminals which are resource constrained systems. The process of authentication and
verification is important as it allows legitimate personnel to enter and perform various operations in
their respective environments. Personal Identification Number (PIN) keys or numeric passwords are
widely used in such resource constrained environments. PIN key is basically small and unique string
of data that is ubiquitously used for user authentication and verification. Usually, PIN key is typed
into PIN entry device (PED) or terminal as shown in Figure 1.

Sensors 2019, 20, 3015; doi:10.3390/s20113015

www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors

Sensors 2019, 20, 3015

2 of 26

Applications with PED

PED Keypad

Adversary System Recording, Processing
and
Predicting PIN

ATM Cash Point

Acoustic Emanations
Identification Checkpoint

PIN Keystrokes

Customer Kiosk

Figure 1. PIN Attack: Acoustic emanations generated from PED keystrokes are recorded and processed
to predict a PIN key by an adversary.

This paper focuses on exploring the security vulnerability of such PED terminals. Passwords are
one of the most important personal authenticating methods in the world. Substantial research has been
done on password authentication, including the reasons how users set their passwords, the rules that
users use to set passwords and the methods to infer passwords [4–9]. When space or cost is limited,
for example, in the case of POS terminals or ATM machines, it is preferable to use numeric passwords,
in other words PIN keys.
The Payment Card Industry (PCI) Standard Council defined the standards of security and testing
requirements for certification of devices used for PIN entry in payment and transaction for the first
time in 2002 [10]. One of the most significant requirements for PEDs physical security is that there
should not be a feasible way to infer the entered digits on PEDs by recording and analyzing the sound,
electromagnetic emissions, power consumption or other external information [10]. Theoretically,
it should not be possible to perform an attack on the PEDs. However, whether the standards are
strictly implemented is an open question. Several security problems of PEDs not mentioned in the
certification already exist. Example are tampering and PIN/card details logging [11], card wedge
allowing transaction approval with no PIN [12], tampering with Point of Sale (POS) terminals to log
PIN and payment data, infecting these devices with malware [13], and ineffective random number
generation by PEDs for cryptographic functions [14].
This paper aims to analyze the security vulnerability of modern PEDs, for example ATM keypads
or POS terminal keypads. ATM keypads allow users to input numeric passwords or PINs. The PIN
entry is quick (small instances of time) because it comprises of a short string of data (4–6 digits) and
it is only typed once by the user. This makes the information inference extremely challenging and
difficult compared to information inference from traditional keyboards in which the user is expected
to type for long instances, which increases the inference likelihood of the user data. Therefore, the goal
of this paper is to study two aspects of this security issue, i.e., attacks on PEDs and the safeguarding of
PEDs against attacks. First, we investigate the possibility of inferring the PIN key. A system that is able
to record the sound emissions of keystroke from the PED keypad (for example, ATM Keypads or POS
keypads) and extract features which are used to predict the PIN, is shown in Figure 1. Secondly, we
look at the feasibility of these acoustic emissions be used in enhancing the security level of PEDs. The

Sensors 2019, 20, 3015

3 of 26

assumption is that each user exhibits a unique behavior while entering the PIN keys. This behavior can
be seen as a fingerprint and as a way to verify the key holder’s identity, thus acting as an authentication
layer that is able to prevent the attack or key theft, and at the same time preserving the public’s
confidence in these systems. Thus, the contribution of this paper is as follows:
•

•

An investigation into the security vulnerability of PEDs by performing a PIN key recover attack
on the random six-digit PIN number by using the acoustic emanation generated by the PED
keypads.
Proposing the behavioral acoustic emanations as a countermeasure and verification method for a
PIN key user’s identity.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents our review of work
presented in the literature on PIN attacks and preventative measures. Section 3 presents the key PIN
recovery attack, along with the methodology through acoustic emanations.
Section 4 explains the idea of user verification by using behavioral acoustics generated from the
PEDs to authenticate user identity and prevent key PIN attacks. Section 5 concludes the paper.
2. Literature Review
In this section, we review the most relevant work in the context of information inference of user
data (Password, Key or PIN). Generally, users lock their information by typing a password or PIN
into the system via a keyboard or keypad. The password or PIN entry into the system generates
different kinds of emissions, which are exploited by adversaries to breach the system’s security for
information theft purposes. In this section, we first present a review of the literature on emission
security, side-channel analysis and key recovery methods from different sensors to have an insight
into different attack models and approaches used to recover a key from the system. In the next section
we shall review countermeasures and approaches present in the literature to prevent key theft.
2.1. Emission Security and Side-Channel Analysis
Early in the 1960s researchers noticed that systems could leak information unintentionally
by electromagnetic, optical or acoustic emissions [15,16]. This type of work, including obtaining
information from unintentional emission analysis and preventing emission from leaking, is known as
TEMPEST [17] in the intelligence and military communities. One feasible method to infer data
was intercepting electromagnetic emissions from cables, such as RS-232 or PS/2 [18,19]. Other
attacks also exist, for example, recovering printed documents by the sound of the printer [20], or
reconstructing the sent data from communication equipment by the LED status indicators [21]. When
the display technology was improved, some researchers also aimed at monitoring video displays by
both electromagnetic and optical emanations [22–24]. The latest research can even eavesdrop from
a cell phone screen or from tablet screen [25–28]. The work presented in [25], the authors presents
a side-channel attack to retrieve PIN from a cell phone screen. The attack was devised by using two
microphone or mics embedded in a cell phone to listen the digit taps when the PIN is entered. The
authors used Time Difference of Arrival (TDOA) technique to infer the location of each sound source
and then it maps with Keypad layout to identify the character/digit with accuracy greater than 50%.
The limitation of the work is that authors attempted to identify single character/digit each time instead
of the combine PIN. The emanations generated during a PIN entry (quick taps) can result in similar
sounds which can lead to false positioning of the digits. The work presented in [26], the authors
presents a mathematical model used to devise character and digit recovery attack from victim’s cell
phone screen. The attack derives prior information such as location of the victim cell phone in relative
the location of the adversary and studies. The authors report that to successfully infer the character
or digit tap information, the distance between the victim and adversary needs to be less than 60
cm. However, in [27], the authors present acoustic side-channel attack to retrieve the lock patters
by using the mic embedded in an android cell phones. The authors use a cellphone application to

Sensors 2019, 20, 3015

4 of 26

record the emanations of lock pattern and used to noise rejection filter, signal segmentation, relative
movement measurement to infer the pattern of the fingertips. The author reports an accuracy of
72% for successfully recovering screen lock patterns and propose dynamic instead of linear patters to
strengthen the security. From these successive attacks on the display, we can draw a conclusion that
data reconstruction from emissions is highly correlated with the hardware design of the destination
devices. The same applies to keypads. The physical design of keypads may lead to various emissions,
such as sound and vibration. Side-channel analysis aims at reconstructing the plaintext, passwords or
other information by gaining information from the hardware. In general, the side-channel attack is not
aggressive. Instead of a direct attack on the information, it is targeted at gaining data from timing [29],
power consumption [30] or electronic emissions [31] while the device is working. Acoustic side-channel
attacks are proved to be possible [32]. The side-channel attack is so useful that it even changed the
threat model, design and certification testing of secure hardware since the late 1990s [33,34]. From the
above cases we can draw the conclusion that when designing a security component, it is necessary to
consider side-channel information leakage.
2.2. Key Recovery from Sensors
In recent years, smart devices are widely used in the industrial environment. The sensitive
information may be unintentionally captured by the devices. If malicious applications were installed in
the devices, this may lead to information leakage [35]. In fact, the side-channel attacks on the recovery
of passwords by analyzing the data from different sensors, such as images, sound and acceleration,
have already been proved to be possible [36–40].
Simon et al. (2013) suggested a new side-channel attack on PINs by gathering data from a mobile
phone’s front camera and microphone [41]. They used a gaming approach (game application) to
perform the attack, including data collection, feature extraction, training a model, recording data
and analyzing results. They used a Support Vector Machine to train the data from two users and got
35–50% prediction accuracy. Next, they tried to recover a PIN key with video and audio streams, but
found that this method required 5 or more attempts to achieve an accuracy of more than 50%
Owusu et al. (2012) suggested that accelerometers can be used to infer passwords [39]. They
collected data in two ways. The first was the area mode, dividing the screen into a 10 by 6 button
array. This mode was used to test how the sampling rate can affect the accuracy of key inference and
the information leakages of different screen regions. 1300 key presses were collected in this mode.
The result showed that a sample rate equal to or above 100 Hz can present the best results. The
other method was character mode. This mode was used to test the keystroke reconstruction attack.
Acceleration data affiliated with key pressing was recorded with pre-processing for feature extraction
and used this data for classification. The authors found that a Random Forest classification algorithm
delivered the best results. It successfully cracked 59 of 99 passwords. Liu et al. (2015) suggested a
side-channel attack on keystrokes by using accelerometer data of a user’s smartwatch [40]. To attack
the POS terminal, they recorded the POS terminal keypad motion and used K-Nearest Neighbor to
select the best option. The authors recorded 4920 movements, including 3720 motions between two
numbers and 1200 “Enter” button movements. The highest accuracy for one-time recovery could reach
65%. Since most POS machines allowed a user to input 3 times, the accuracy could be improved to
around 85%.
Asonov et al. (2004) used acoustic emanations and performed the attack to recognize the key
pressing by applying a neural network [36]. They extracted features from raw acoustic signals by
applying a Fourier Transform with 2–3 ms or 8–10 ms window to the signals to find push peaks and
trained the system with user keystrokes on a standard QWERTY keyboard.
The result showed that a network trained for one person can be applied to attack another person’s
key pressing on the same keyboard. However, when the keyboard changed, the success rate dropped
to 28%. This means that the neural network is only applicable on the keyboard that is used to generate
the training set. The main reason for sound differences between keys is the different positions on

Sensors 2019, 20, 3015

5 of 26

the keyboard plate. We make a conclusion in this paper that the sound tune was actually used to
differentiate between the key pressings.
Zhuang et al. (2005) tried to improve the method. They used cepstrum to extract features. In
addition, they used unsupervised key recognition (K-Means) to classify the keystrokes with a larger
number of keys of the keyboard [37]. Then they applied a Hidden Markov Model to determine the key
sequence to improve the accuracy along with spelling and grammar checking to yield the accuracy rate
and trained their classifiers. Their experimental results showed that linear classification and Gaussian
mixtures had a better performance than a neural network.
Zhu et al. (2014) presented a method to recover keystrokes (push and release) without context
analysis [38]. Their analysis indicated that the minimal distinguishable distance between two sound
sources was (343 m/s)/(44.1 kHz) 0.77 cm, which is less than the distance between two adjacent keys
on the keyboard. They used two or more mobile phones in different places to record the sound from
the keyboard, which were pre-processed to find the sound peak in each 100 ms. The experiments
showed that 3 or more phone microphones lead to more accurate results. Time sync was a sensitive
problem in this method. To address this problem, they used a fixed distance between keyboard and
phones to synchronize the time. The accuracy of this method was quite acceptable, as more than 72.2%
keys were recovered.
Cardaioli et al. suggested a PIN inference method by analyzing user’s typing behavior [42].
The behavior features are extracted from audio signal; They used thermal camera to retrieve more
information to raise the accuracy. Faria et al. performed a new side-channel attack on PIN pads [43].
They used two inner mics to record audio and differential analysis of the vibration signal differences
between the keystrokes to infer the PIN.
2.3. Preventative Measures against Key Recovery Approaches
Researchers supposed various methods of attack on PEDs. These attacks focused on the key
stroke to recover the PIN. Many countermeasures against side-channel attacks were suggested,
including changing the physical architecture of devices [44,45] and adding noise to the side-channel
emanation [46,47]. Another possible method is adding an additional verification layer combined with
PINs. There are three main streams of verification methods, i.e., biometrics, keystroke dynamics and
active authentication.
2.3.1. Biometrics
Biometrics are unique physical traits and behavioral characteristics that work as excellent
candidates for automated recognition and authentication [48]. Conventionally, biometrics are
sub-classified into Physiological and Behavioral characteristics [49]. Instances of physiological
authentication systems include fingerprint scanning, face recognition, and DNA recognition. These
are static features and are unique across a large domain of users. On the contrary, behavioral traits
include the amplitude and pitch of a user’s voice, the way people sign their names, and their keyboard
typing patterns. Unlike the former, behavioral characters are dynamic and are revealing of the user’s
psychological composition (cognitive fingerprint) instead of stable physical features [50]. Therefore,
resilience is a concern as a sudden and gradual deviation from expected user behavior is inevitable
and requires a robust system capable of adapting to change over a prolonged period. In comparison to
physiological traits, behavior authentication is inexpensive and passive.
Researchers have also asserted that for the foreseeable future, biometric services will not
eliminate issued ID cards and password PINs, but rather complement the identification process
and accountability of the authentication workflow [51]. Furthermore, behavioral biometrics never
yield an absolute match between the expected and the input during the verification step. As a
result, the False Acceptance Rate (FAR) and the False Rejection Rate (FRR) are not as low as the ones
provided by physiological verification. Therefore, behavioral factors alone cannot constitute a reliable
authentication system for the various extrinsic factors involved, such as mood and fatigue. Ogihara

Sensors 2019, 20, 3015

6 of 26

et al. (2006) proposed a verification method using biometric features [52]. By both calculating the
similarities of key press timing between current operators and users and comparing extracted hand
shape features, they can improve the security of ATM authentication. One method was key press
timing. To process a 4-digit PIN, they calculated the press and release time for each key, and the time
between two adjacent PIN key number. Another method was extraction of hand shape features. If the
two methods were used separately, the error rates were between 10% to 25%. If the two methods were
combined, the error rate was reduced to 1.1%.
2.3.2. Active Authentication
Presently, active authentication is the norm when it comes to validating the identity of a user for
access applications [53,54]. It requires explicit user interaction (a passphrase or inputting a fingerprint,
etc.) which authorizes the user based on the legitimacy of the input. If successfully authorized,
the user is provisioned system resources until session timeout, or until the user voluntarily logs
out. Any activity during this session period is accounted to the authenticated user and an impostor
physically present at the system cannot be detected. Furthermore, after a session timeout, users must
digress from their intended objective in mind to perform the cumbersome authorization step, yet
again. Active authentication alleviates these complications by continuously authenticating users on
the way they interact with the environment. These interactions construct the cognitive fingerprint of
the user and reveal how the brain processes the technology in hand. Active authentication has the
potential to detect intruders after successful authentication, and cases where the user’s password have
been compromised. Additionally, since the interaction depends on the technology in hand, software
could also be devised to help employers distinguish between employees working from home and
office. This research work argues that the latencies between the successive keystrokes, key duration,
finger placement and applied pressure can be used to construct a unique cognitive signature for a
user in a non-intrusive manner [51]. This work studied Euclidean distance, non-weighted probability,
and weighted probability algorithms to determine the authenticity of a user typing a username and
password. The authors report an authentication accuracy of 83.22% with Euclidean distance, 85.63%
accuracy with non-weighted probability and 87.18% accuracy with weighted probability.
The works reviewed above explains different PIN recovery attack models used along with
countermeasure approaches present in the literature. For PIN recovery attack, our focus is to devise
a simple yet effective methodology. The works [13,38] provide us with an interesting insight that
motivates the consideration of a PIN key recovery attack on modern PEDs. We derive our methodology
from these two works that focus on using time intervals of keystrokes generated from acoustic
emanations of the PEDs. The methodology is composed of simple common-off-the-shelf (COTS)
devices which consider features that can be easily be extracted from acoustic emanations. PIN Key
recovery through acoustic emanations is unique and the methodology is devised such that it act as a
general framework that can be readily formed and applied to any modern PED that uses small strings
of data. It covers groups of PINs no matter that they are random or not, which is different. This makes
our methodology simple yet effective compared to attack models reviewed above. Also, our approach
overcomes the shortcomings and limitations of [13,37,43] and the feasibility of application in real life is
improved compared to the method of [25,38].
To defend PIN attack and verify the identity of the person when entering a PIN, we used the
acoustic emanations to extract the timing feature, which saves save many time, space and power
compared to Ogihara’s method [52], which used camera to record the motion of hand. Moreover,
microphones are cheaper than cameras. In comparison, our method’s cost is lower, both in the required
devices and computational power. Compared to current active authentication [53], the lower cost is
also an advantage of our method. Active authentication requires a fingerprint, this means we need a
fingerprint sensor, which is more expensive than a microphone, to do the recording. If we use a mobile
phone to perform active authentication, we need to send messages to the user. The vendor will charge
for the message fee when authentication is performed, whereas our preventative measure eradicates

Sensors 2019, 20, 3015

7 of 26

these issues. The proposed behavioral acoustic detection for user verification is simple and novel that
can successfully prevent a KEY PIN recovery attack and acts as an authentication security layer for
modern PEDs. In the subsequent sections both the PIN recovery attack based on acoustic emanations
and verification based on behavioral acoustics of PIN key users are explained.
3. Acoustic Side-Channel PIN Recovery
The advent of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and automation is slowly obviating the need for cashiers
in supermarkets and grocery stores, making self-checkout lines increasingly popular. Although these
services are convenient from the consumer’s outlook, they do pose serious security implications for
them. For instance, the checkout kiosk can collect data pertinent to the user’s behavioral characteristics
and exploit them to recover data entered over third party trusted interfaces using side-channel analysis.
To better understand this, consider the following application-threat model.
3.1. Application-Threat Model: PIN Key Recovery by Using Acoustic Emanations at Customer Kiosks
In this application-threat model, we consider an automated self-check-out machine in an industry
canteen that does the job of calculating the total bill and collecting the payment using a debit card
transaction. The kiosk is assumed to be fitted with a microphone device that is equipped to connect to
the customer service for assistance. Now, when the customer completes the item checkout process, he
is prompted to enter some information (e.g., a telephone number) or key that allows the microphone
to collect data regarding the user characteristics using keystroke acoustic emanations. Once this
system is trained with the user’s habitual typing patterns, it prompts the user to enter his debit card
and PIN number, which is obfuscated by the trusted banking interface. The idea is to exploit these
acoustic emanations carefully such that the system can predict the PIN. To perform such an attack, the
methodology followed is explain below.
3.2. Methodology
Our methodology consists of four systems that will be elaborated on in the following sections of
this paper, namely (a) Data Collection, (b) Feature Extraction, (c) Time-Frequency Analysis, and (d)
Acoustic/Data Analytics. The data collection is considered the front end of the system, whereas every
other phase resides in the back end as shown in Figure 2.
Front End

System

• Audio
Recording of
PIN Entry

Data Generated

Data Collection

• Raw Acoustic
Data
• PIN String User

Back End
Feature
Extraction
• Press &
Release
Detection

•
•
•
•
•
•

User
Press Region
Release Region
Latency
Hold Time
PIN String

Time-Frequency
Feature Analysis
• Cross
Correlation
• Frequency
Pertinent
Feature
Generation

• Cross
Correlation
• Frequency
Distance

Figure 2. Experimental workflow diagram.

Data Analysis
• Prediction
• Verification
based on
Acoustic Data

• User Biometric
Verification
Based on
Typing
Behavior

Sensors 2019, 20, 3015

8 of 26

3.2.1. Data Collection
With reference to the application-threat model presented above, we are mostly interested in the
emissions emitted from the keystrokes during the PIN entry. We carried out our experiments on an
ATM PIN Entry Device and recorded the emitted acoustics using a Video mic recorder as shown in
Figure 3.

Figure 3. Experimental setup.

The users were asked to memorize a six-digit numbered PIN and adapt themselves to this new
PIN sequence by entering it on the keypad device until familiar with the keystroke patterns. Once the
user was trained, we placed the PED under a recording tool (Figure 3) and asked the user to enter the
memorized PIN. After finishing the PIN entry, the raw acoustic data is fed to the workstation for future
acoustic analysis. Each PIN sequence is entered four consecutive times before proceeding to the next
PIN sequence in the list. This list consisted of four PINs and comprises all possible transitions ranging
from (a) short, (b) long, and (c) diagonal. From here on, we constructed an audio signal repository of 15
users, with each user entering four distinct PINs for a total of four times. Throughout the experiment,
the acoustic data was collected using a Rode microphone designed for typical personal audio recording.
The tool collects data from a directed source in the frequency range 40 Hz to 20 kHz, together with an

Sensors 2019, 20, 3015

9 of 26

80 Hz high-pass filter that prevent low-end noise from being recorded. All recordings were triggered
by a MATLAB script that instructed the audio recorder to collect data for a certain interval.
3.2.2. Feature Extraction
As explained in [36], regions in the keystroke generated acoustic signal can be associated with
particular events, specifically the press and release events as shown in Figure 4. Every analysis in this
paper considers these two regions (Press & Release) as separate entities and excludes the intermediate
region in-between. Therefore, estimations for distance and similarity metrics are evaluated for
corresponding events as proposed in [55] and [36]. For instance, the pairwise similarity between
‘ f ’ and ‘g’ is calculated in the following manner.

similarity press = pairwiseSimilarity ( f press , g press )

(1)

similarityrelease = pairwiseSimilarity ( f release , grelease )

(2)

1
(similarity press + similarityrelease )
2

(3)

similarityoverall =

Figure 4. Press and Release region in a keystroke generated acoustic signal.

Figures 5 and 6 demonstrate the feature extraction console constructed in MATLAB to generate the
feature vector by using a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) that represents the PIN entry acoustic signals.
This console employs key press detection techniques explained in [55] to pinpoint the beginning of
each key press and derives the features that are conducive to this research. Most of these features are
represented in Figure 7 and Table 1.

Sensors 2019, 20, 3015

10 of 26

Figure 5. Custom MATLAB feature extraction console.

Figure 6. Sum of FFT coefficients to detect Key Pres.

Sensors 2019, 20, 3015

11 of 26

Figure 7. Various features analyzed in this project.

Table 1. Compelling features observed in acoustic signals.
Feature

Unit

Inter-Keystroke latency
Hold time
Hit Peak
Release Peak
Press Time
Release Time
Press Volume
Release Volume
Press Spectrum
Release Spectrum

Time
Time duration
Time
Time
Time duration
Time duration
Volume against Time
Volume against Time
FFT coefficients
FFT coefficients

To make the machine-learning algorithms work, it is important to employ appropriate signal
processing techniques to engineer features that serve as meaningful inputs. Although we later show
that Table 1 consists of the reliable features when it comes to user verification, in the next section of
this paper we discuss the feature engineering pertinent to time-frequency analysis as a part of our
methodology.
3.2.3. Time-Frequency Analysis
This section discusses the cross-correlation analysis that we used along with frequency distancing
to predict user PINs solely from the acoustic signals. Unlike other papers, we cannot employ dictionary
models or character pair frequency analysis, because the PIN entries are completely random.
1. Cross-Correlation: We use MATLAB’s xcorr function to calculate the cross-correlation between
two acoustic signals normalized with respect to power. If the two signals are ‘f’ and ‘g’, the

Sensors 2019, 20, 3015

12 of 26

discretized cross-correlation measures the similarity between ‘f’ and shifted (lagged) copies of ‘g’
as a function of the lag. If ‘f’ and ‘g’ have different lengths, the function appends zeros at the end
of the shorter vector. [56]
xcoor ( f , g) = ( f ∗ g)[lag]

(4)

The function, xcorr, yields different outputs based on the input lag parameter. To calculate the
similarity between the two signals, we select the maximum cross-correlation value emitted for
any input lag parameter.

lag
]}e{ all possiblelagvalues}
lag

(5)

similarity( x, y) = maximum( xc)

(6)

xc = {( f ∗ g)[

2. Frequency-Based Distance: The frequency domain distance between a pair of signals is calculated
by measuring the Euclidean distance between the frequency spectrum of the two signals.
Spectrum is calculated by evaluating the FFT coefficients in the range 0.4–22 kHz [55]. For the
two signals ‘ f ’ and ‘g’, the frequency-based distance is measured using the following equations.

FFT f = FFT ( f ), FFTcoe f f f e[0.4, 22.05]kHz

(7)

FFTg = FFT ( g), FFTcoe f f e[0.4, 22.05]kHz

(8)

distance = EuclideanDistance( FFT f , FFTs g )

(9)

Time-Frequency analysis is classical approach commonly used in feature extraction in different
behavioral authentication mechanisms [42]. In our case, Time-frequency analysis helps in extraction
of useful features such as hold time and release time etc. (rest are mentioned in Table 1)) from the
acoustic emanations generated from the keystrokes during PIN entry. Based on the features extracted
from time-frequency analysis, the system is trained with different machine-learning models. The
machine-learning models used are discussed in the next section.
3.2.4. Machine-Learning Models and Assessments
We use the extracted features to train the machine learning models and make predictions. We
analyze the robustness against certain criteria by indicating the FAR FRR and TAR of the models.
1. Machine Learning: This work evaluates three machine-learning models, specifically:
(a) Gaussian Naïve Bayes (Gaussian NB)
(b) Logistic Regression (LR), and
(c) Support Vector Machines (SVM)
In our task, we know the input and we know what the output should be; however, we do not
have an algorithm to transform the input to the output. When we meet this situation, we can
try machine-learning. Our dataset can be labeled as positive and negative examples, e.g., if the
PIN is entered by User 1, we mark it positive, otherwise we mark negative. Supervised learning
is suitable for the labeled data [57]. We extract 10 kinds of features from the raw acoustic data,
including inter-keystroke latency, hold time, hit peak, release peak, press time, release time,
press volume, release volume, press spectrum, release spectrum. We want to find which feature
contribute most to help us to make decision. Gaussian Naïve Bayes classifier distributes the
same representational power to each feature [58]. Thus, we applied the Gaussian Naïve Bayes

Sensors 2019, 20, 3015

13 of 26

classifier to the dataset and found when we use latency and hold time as features, we can get
the best result. The latency and hold time are categorical features, the expected outcomes, e.g.,
User 1 entered the PIN, are categorical as well. In this situation, logistic regression is suited
to describe the relationship between features and outcomes [59]. The SVM can add exponents
to the feature and raise the accuracy of the model [60], this can neutralize the negative effect
of the small number of features in our case. In Section 3.3, our goal is to prove the threat that
use acoustic emanation to recover a PIN is possible. Thus, we only trained a logistic regression
model. In Section 4, the essential part of this paper, we tried 3 models to reach the best accuracy
in user verification.
2. False Acceptance Rate (FAR), False Rejection Rate (FRR) and True Acceptance Rate (TAR): This
section provides a description of metrics for the evaluation of Biometric performance. FAR and
FRR are used in assessing authentication or verification system, e.g., [61,62]. True acceptance
rate means the accuracy of the prediction model. Typically, setting a global acceptance threshold
requires considering the tradeoff between the false acceptance rate and false rejection rate.
(a) FAR: This is the measure of the likelihood that the security system will incorrectly accept an
access attempt by an unauthorized user.
Number of false acceptance
(10)
Number of identification attempts
(b) FRR: This is the measure of the likelihood that the security system will incorrectly reject an
access attempt by an authorized user.
FAR =

Number of false rejections
(11)
Number of identification attempts
(c) TAR: This is the measure of the likelihood that the security system will correctly accept an
access attempt by an authorized user.
FRR =

TAR =

Number of true acceptance
Number of identification attempts

(12)

This methodology is devised such that it can be applied and integrated to any POS terminal or
machine. The system records the acoustic emanations, then extracts press and release time interval
features that are conducive to identify the user for future access attempts. The methodology is
non-invasive, meaning that the features are not derived from a data feed generated by the ATM
machine, but rather collected externally using a microphone, with background noise cancellation
and omission of certain known frequencies like the ATM’s feedback sound. This modular approach
significantly reduces the cost of integrating the reinforcement and compares inexpensive to other
candidates such as iris detection and fingerprint scanning, as it only requires an additional audio
recording module. The methodology presented acts as general framework that is simple to implement
and execute on any keyboard or PED keypads. In the following section we shall present our experiment
and results in the light of the application-threat model presented above to recover a key PIN.
3.3. Experiment and Results
During the PIN entry the microphone collects the acoustic data and performs time frequency
decoding [55] to recover the PIN entered by the user. The objective is to analyze the risk of such an
attack that can be implemented by shopkeepers on a point of sales terminal (POS) or a self-checkout
kiosk. The experiment was performed in the following steps:
• An audio signal repository was established for the key presses 1, 5, 6, 8, 9, and 7 for a targeted user.
• The repository was divided into testing and training sets.
• Then a similarity function was implemented using pairwise cross-correlation.

Sensors 2019, 20, 3015

14 of 26

• Each testing and training keystroke ‘f’, was transformed into a feature vector that consisted of
six elements. Each element describes the average similarity of ‘f’ against the acoustic emanations
generated from a specific key source. (i.e., feature(f) = similarity to key 1, similarity to key 5,
similarity to key 6 and so on)
• The features are then plotted for the press and release regions followed by min-max scaling.
The data analysis considers different inputs and yields outputs that discern the ATM PINs entered
by the user.
3.3.1. Time-Frequency Analysis
Our initial experimental results show that simple cross-correlation analysis of keystroke acoustic
emissions could indicate the correct keystroke if trained on a device for a targeted user. The empirical
data suggests that emanations produced from a specific key exhibit higher similarity to presses of the
same key than that of other keys as shown in Figures 8 and 9.

Figure 8. Similarity of press and release of key "6" with key "8".

Figure 9. Similarity of press and release of key "5" with key "1".

As the correlation plot itself provided perceptible evidence to discern the source of the keystroke,
the implementation of a Logistic Regression model to train and test the data yielded correct predictions

Sensors 2019, 20, 3015

15 of 26

for most keystrokes if trained on a targeted user. However, there are a few shortcomings in
this approach.
First, we observed a drop in prediction accuracy when the model was trained on multiple users
and then tested for a specific user. This indicates that it is not as likely to successfully execute an attack
by using dummy users to train the system and then recovering the customer’s PIN by cross-correlating
the corresponding key presses. This is because different users employ dissimilar typing styles, which
influences the acoustic signal due to varying incident angles and applied pressure. In fact, these
differences are due to varying finger positions while entering the PIN and other inherent behavioral
characteristics.
Secondly, in the above experiment, the training set also sees other entries with identical PIN
sequence for the targeted user. This is a concern because the angle of incidence also depends on the
key character pressed immediately before. This influences the signal produced from that particular key
button, making it distinct for different PIN sequences. This indicates that it is not so likely to achieve
similar results on the customer’s PIN entry if the system is trained to learn on other key sequences like
birth date and phone numbers.
Therefore, to compensate for these concerns, the new training set only comprised of PIN sequences
that are distinct from the one being tested. This ensures that the single character accuracy remains
independent of PIN sequence. Doing so, we can gauge the possibility where the kiosk asks the
customer to input his phone number and birth date, to ultimately recover the ATM PIN.
3.3.2. Data Analysis
We consider a Logistic Regression model that takes in a pairwise cross-correlation matrix as the
feature inputs, and outputs the predicted keystroke.

s f ,k := (

Σin=1 similarity( f , t[i ])
, t = {Acoustic signals generated from key k})
n
f u,i = (S f ,0 , S f ,1 , S f ,2 , S f ,3 , S f ,4 , S f ,5 , S f ,6 , S f ,7 , S f ,8 , S f ,9 )

(14)

Input : Similaritiesacquiredthroughtime f requencydecoding

(15)

Output : Key

(16)

(13)

According to the results (Figure 10), it is possible to predict single characters of the PIN sequence
to a certain degree of accuracy that lies above 62%. Additionally, the results also indicate that the
accuracy when the training domain consisted of various users was not as low as previously expected.
This signifies that the cross-correlated features specifically target the button’s mechanical properties
instead of behavioral characteristics. Therefore, the threat model presented for this experiment is
feasible, provided the customer is duped into revealing a huge set of keystrokes.

Sensors 2019, 20, 3015

16 of 26

Figure 10. Logistic Regression results for single character detection.

4. Behavioral Acoustics for Verification of a PIN Key Users
In the last section, we proved that it is possible to infer the PIN key using acoustic data. As a
countermeasure, we propose a verification method to defend security from this attack. Our method
extends the hypothesis made in [51] that suggests the use of keystroke dynamics to serve as an
additional layer in the user authentication workflow. This work proposes that analyzing the way the
user types from the acoustic signals emanated during keypress can provide countermeasures against
various risks relating to theft and fraudulent impersonation. We shall gauge the reliability of such
mechanisms and propose a general architecture to enhance the reliability of authentication systems
that impacts on ATM security and workspace controls.
4.1. Authentication Based on Acoustic Analytics
The main idea of this study is that the keystroke acoustic data collected over a certain number of
times for a particular user, is distinctive enough to construct a cognitive fingerprint for that specific user.
Figure 11 shows how the inter-keystroke timings vary between two users for a given PIN sequence (six
digits) entered on a PIN Entry device (PED). The vertical lines in the plot indicate the range of latencies
exhibited for specific transitions, with the connected dots signifying the mean latencies. For instance,
it can be visually inferred from Figure 11 that ‘User 8’ generally takes more time between subsequent
keystrokes as compared to ‘User 9’. Features like these are revealing of the user’s psychological
signature, which can be used to verify the veracity of new entry attempts.

Sensors 2019, 20, 3015

17 of 26

Figure 11. Inter-keystroke variation on 2 users.

The data collected in the previous experiment was obtained from a PIN Entry device (Figure 12)
for the PIN sequence ‘347012’. On the keypad, the distance between ‘4’– ‘7’ and ‘3’ – ‘4’ correspond
to a ‘short’ and ‘diagonal’ transition, respectively. While it is observed that the transition type
(distance) influences the inter-keystroke latency exhibited, these trends are susceptible to pauses that
are distinctive to the operating user. At the same time, pauses are beneficial as it is considered by the
classification algorithm during user verification.

Figure 12. Data collection ATM PED.

Sensors 2019, 20, 3015

18 of 26

In the following section, we shall present an application-threat model in which we explain how
an adversary can compromise the user specific information, sufficient to authenticate himself as a
legitimate user and how authentication based on acoustic analytics is used to create a biometric that
can act as an additional layer in the user authentication work flow.
4.2. Application-Threat Model: User Authentication Based on Acoustic Analytics of an ATM Machine
Consider the application-threat model where the adversary is assumed to have seized the ATM
card and ATM and Personal Identification Number (PIN) of a cardholder using unfair means. The
adversary then goes to the ATM machine and authenticates himself successfully as he previously
managed to attain the entities that satisfy the ATM’s challenges.
Considering the countermeasures for the above threat model, the only entity that is
non-transferable from the victim to the adversary is the biometric characteristics (i.e., typing rhythm,
iris recognition). In this case, the third remaining degree is the biometrics to resolve entry-attempt
authenticity that acts as a countermeasure to prevent such risks.
4.2.1. Data Analysis and Results
This section focuses on the acoustic analytics performed for the features gleaned from the previous
systems. First, we describe the feature set and then detail the models that provide the strongest results.
1. Gaussian Naïve Bayes classifier with Latency features: In this analysis, every PIN sequence is
encoded into a feature vector by extracting the latencies associated with all the five transitions in
the six-digit numbered PINs. This vector is then fed into a Gaussian Naïve Bayes classifier that
trains itself to output the predicted users.

lu,i,j = latency for transition j in the PIN entry samplei collected from User u

(17)

f u,i = (lu,i,1 , lu,i,2 , lu,i,3 , lu,i,4 , lu,i,5 )

(18)

Input = { Latencies}

(19)

Output = User

(20)

Figure 13 shows the class-conditioned probabilities of observing a particular latency feature ‘x’
for a given class ‘y’ for the first transition of a given PIN sequence. Likewise, the model trains
itself for all five transition to discern various users in the training set. Once trained, we analyze
the accuracy of this model on our testing set. Again, the test set consists of latency-based features
with the vector cardinality being five. For every test instance, the model outputs a probability
vector, which depicts the model’s confidence for every user. We derive a ranking order from
the probability list. According to the formulation, rank ‘0’ is assigned to the user that the model
believes is the correct answer, rank ’1’ is the second strongest prediction, and henceforth. The
table in Figure 14 depicts the rankings awarded to the actual users during the testing stage. A
model is considered good if the occurrences where it rewards the true user a rank ‘0’ is high. To
better understand the predictions, we plot the False Acceptance Rate (FAR), False Rejection Rate
(FRR) and True Acceptance Rate (TAR) yielded for various confidence threshold values.

Sensors 2019, 20, 3015

19 of 26

Figure 13. Class-conditioned Probability for two Users typing a specific PIN.

(a) Rank assigned to true
(b) Evolution of Gaussian NB on latency data
users
Figure 14. Ranking awarded to true user during Gaussian NB testing.

2. Gaussian Naïve Bayes classifier with Latency and Hold features: Here, we consider the case
where the feature vector consists of latency and hold-based features. We retain the feature set
collected from the previous section and concatenated it with the features acquired for the hold
time. The hold time for a keystroke is evaluated by measuring the latency between the press and
release starting points. Figure 15 provides a visual representation of the many non-overlapping
features that assist the classifier to discriminate users.

Sensors 2019, 20, 3015

20 of 26

hu,i,j = hold time for keypress j in the PIN entry samplei collected from User u

(21)

f u,i = (lu,i,1 , lu,i,2 , lu,i,3 , lu,i,4 , lu,i,5 , lu,i,6 )

(22)

Input = { Latency + Hold}

(23)

Output = User

(24)

From Figure 15, it is evident by the increase in number of true users labeled ‘0’ that the classifier’s
performance has incremented with the inclusion of hold time. This corroborates the claim that
the ‘hold time’ exhibits user specific characteristics. Furthermore, it can be inferred from the
figure that a confidence threshold value at around 80% (0.8), can yield an approximate 80% TAR,
20% FAR, and 20% FRR. In addition to that out of all the 37 instances that were incorrectly not
ranked ‘0’, there was only one occurrence of two consecutive false rejections. This means that if a
user is falsely rejected by an authentication system, then the likelihood of being rejected again in
the next attempt is negligible.

(a) Inter keystroke timings of the two users
(b) Hold time of the key presses by the two users
Figure 15. Inter-keystroke Timings and Hold Variation of the two user entries.

3. Logistic Regression with latency and hold features: In this segment, we consider a change in
the machine-learning model as compared to the previous section of the paper. The generative
Gaussian Naïve Bayes model is replaced with a discriminative Logistic Regression model, and
the input only consists of latency and hold-based features.
Input : { Latency + Hold}

(25)

Output : User

(26)

Compared to the previous techniques, Figure 16 shows an increase in performance. In fact, this
model achieved the highest accuracy for this experiment. The number of actual users awarded
the rank ‘0’ increased from 80% to 87%. Similarly, setting the threshold at a confidence value
of 40% (0.4) achieved an 88% TAR, 12% FAR, and 12% FRR. Additionally, there was no such
instance recorded where there were two consecutive false rejections. Since this data set only
consists of 15 users, the occurrences of false rejection will be higher when rolled out for a vast
user domain. Although rare, as we consider entry attempts by all false users and train on a small

Sensors 2019, 20, 3015

21 of 26

data set, it is important to counteract this scenario by letting the user type in the PIN sequence
again. The likelihood of the user being rejected in the second attempt is low, and the user is
challenged up to three times before complete access denial. However, on the downside, allowing
three attempts could also have a detrimental impact on the false acceptance rate.

(a) Rank assigned to true
users
(b) Evolution of Logistic Regression on latency and Hold data
Figure 16. Ranking awarded to true user with Logistic Regression testing.

4. Support Vector Machine with Latency and Hold: In this section, we gauge the performance of a
Support Vector Machine model to classify the data.
Input : { Latency + Hold}

(27)

Output : User

(28)

The performance was found to be similar to Gaussian Naïve Bayes, but less accurate compared
to logistic regression, Table 2 shows the accuracy of SVM.
Table 2. Rank Assigned to the True Users (SVM).
Rank
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Occurrences
163
21
7
1
2
1
1
1
2

Percentage
81.9096
10.5528
3.5179
0.5025
1.0050
0.5025
0.5025
0.5025
0.0050

4.2.2. Enhanced Authentication Architecture
We investigated several machine-learning models and feature engineering techniques that could
serve as a behavioral biometric for user verification during PIN entry. The overall results of these
models are shown in Table 3. The first column of the Table 3 shows the machine-learning models that
we used; the second column shows the features that we used in the machine-learning model; the third
to fifth column show the false acceptance rate, false rejection rate and true acceptance rate respectively.
The detail explanation of FAR, FRR and TAR can be found in Section 3.2.4. We started with simplest
method that is by using Gaussian NB model with a single feature that is latency, the results in FAR to

Sensors 2019, 20, 3015

22 of 26

22%, FRR to be 22% and TAR to be 75%. This mean that the 75% of the time, system is able to correctly
identify the authorized user attempt for PIN entry (i.e., TAR) whereas, 22%–24% of the time either the
system incorrectly accepts an access attempt by an authorized user or the system incorrectly rejects an
access attempt by an authorized user. Similarly, are the rest of the results shown in Table 3. Importantly,
we deduce that Logistic Regression as a means to train on latency and hold-based features is sufficient
(results in TAR to be 88%, the best compared to the result models used) to verify user authenticity.
Figure 17 shows the variation of hold time and latency of different users. The vertical axis of Figure 17
means the occurrence rates of hold time and latency features; the horizontal axis means the numbers
of hold time and latency, respectively. The histograms in Figure 17 show the occurrence rate of each
hold time or latency of different users; the curves show the general distribution of hold time or latency
of different users, respectively. The proposed fool proof extendable model provides a cost effective,
backward compatible, resilient biometric verification system that improves classifications and adapts
to behavioral rhythms over time. As the training set is relatively small, it exemplifies the quick learning
rate during the enrolment phase.
Table 3. Overall results (Acoustic Biometric Verification).
Model

Feature

FAR

FRR

TAR

Gaussian NB
Gaussian NB
Logistic Regression
Support Vector Machines

Latency
Latency and Hold
Latency and Hold
Latency and Hold

22%
20%
12%
18

22%
20%
12%
18

75%
81%
88%
82%

(b) Latency variation of the acoustic data with
(a) Hold time variation of acoustic data
different users
with different users
Figure 17. Hold and Latency variation with different users.

The experiment was carried out by requesting the users to select a PIN from a list of five PIN
sequences and completing the training and testing procedures that follow. Once completed, the user
moves to the next PIN sequence in the list and repeat the exercise. In this survey, each PIN sequences
(four digits) is entered 11 times as a part of the training phase and another ten times as testing. Subjects
also maintained a consistent typing style throughout the exercise.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we addressed three practical scenarios that are influenced by the emergence
of keystroke dynamics, side-channel analysis, and machine learning. This research evaluated the
feasibility of these scenarios in contexts that have never been explored before and examines various

Sensors 2019, 20, 3015

23 of 26

frameworks. First, we devised a PIN key recovery attack and used the acoustic signal to successfully
recover 4–6-digit random PINs from the emanations generated from the keystrokes. Secondly, we
proved that it is possible to verify user identity from acoustic emanations. Based on the results, we
proposed a defense mechanism to thwart user impersonation attempts and several other risks, thus
elevating the security of the PEDs. We plan to improve our experiment in the future. A limitation
of our work is the size of training set. For a PIN, a user only enters 4 times in our experiment. We
consider increase the number to 8 or 10 times per PIN. Extension of this work is in the plan as well.
As we already proved that time interval between keystrokes can be used to verify user, we suggest
this technique can be applied in other area. Also, different (supervised) machine-learning models
are also be tested. One possible application is remote authentication. When user enters password on
the website, the time intervals between keystrokes are recorded and used to verify the user’s identity.
Another potential application is mobile phone unlocking. Due to the impact of Covoid-19, iPhone
users must wear masks and cannot use face ID (a technique that can detect user’s face to verify the
user) to unlock their phone. Instead they must use PIN, which is possible to be record by others. We
plan to record the time intervals between two presses on screen and use these to verify user.
Author Contributions: Y.L. and G.P.H. conceived the idea of this research; S.P. and Y.L. performed the experiments,
S.P., Y.L., U.M.Q. analyzed the data; Y.L., U.M.Q. and G.P.H. wrote and reviewed the paper. All authors have read
and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported by City University of Hong Kong Projects CityU 11200017 (7004892) and
CityU 11202618 (7005053).
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.
10.

11.

Xu, L.D.; He, W.; Li, S. Internet of Things in Industries: A Survey. IEEE Trans. Ind. Informatics 2014,
10, 2233–2243.
Atzori, L.; Iera, A.; Morabito, G. The internet of things: A survey. Comput. Networks 2010, 54, 2787–2805.
Zhou, L.; Yeh, K.H.; Hancke, G.; Liu, Z.; Su, C. Security and privacy for the industrial internet of things: An
overview of approaches to safeguarding endpoints. IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 2018, 35, 76–87.
Golla, M.; Beuscher, B.; Dürmuth, M. On the security of cracking-resistant password vaults. In Proceedings
of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, Vienna, Austria, 24–28
October 2016; pp. 1230–1241.
Wang, D.; Zhang, Z.; Wang, P.; Yan, J.; Huang, X. Targeted online password guessing: An underestimated
threat. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security,
Vienna, Austria, 24–28 October 2016; pp. 1242–1254.
Yang, W.; Li, N.; Chowdhury, O.; Xiong, A.; Proctor, R.W. An empirical study of mnemonic sentence-based
password generation strategies. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security, Vienna, Austria, 24–28 October 2016; pp. 1216–1229.
Chatterjee, R.; Athayle, A.; Akhawe, D.; Juels, A.; Ristenpart, T. pASSWORD tYPOS and how to correct
them securely. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), San Jose, CA, USA,
22–26 May 2016; pp.799–818.
Silver, D.; Jana, S.; Boneh, D.; Chen, E.; Jackson, C. Password managers: Attacks and defenses. In Proceedings
of the 23rd {USENIX} Security Symposium ({USENIX} Security 14), San Diego, CA, USA, 20–22 August
2014; pp. 449–464.
Yan, J.; Blackwell, A.; Anderson, R.; Grant, A. Password memorability and security: Empirical results. IEEE
Secur. Priv. 2004, 2, 25–31.
Payment Card Industry (PCI). PIN Transaction Security (PTS) Point of Interaction (POI); Security Standards
Council: Wakefield, MA, USA, 2011. Available online: https://www.pci-dss.gr/media/1955/pci_pts_poi_
vq_v4_final.pdf (accessed on June 2013).
Drimer, S.; Murdoch, S.J.; Anderson, R. Thinking inside the box: system-level failures of tamper proofing. In
Proceedigns of the 2008 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (sp 2008), Oakland, CA, USA, 18–22 May
2008; pp. 281–295.

Sensors 2019, 20, 3015

12.
13.
14.

15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

29.

30.
31.

32.

33.
34.
35.

24 of 26

Murdoch, S.J.; Drimer, S.; Anderson, R.; Bond, M. Chip and PIN is Broken. In Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy, Oakland, California, USA, 16-19 May 2010; pp. 433–446.
Anderson, R.; Murdoch, S.J. EMV: Why payment systems fail. Commun. ACM 2014, 57, 24–28.
Bond, M.; Choudary, O.; Murdoch, S.J.; Skorobogatov, S.; Anderson, R. Chip and Skim: cloning EMV cards
with the pre-play attack. In Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, San Jose, CA,
USA, 18–21 May 2014; pp. 49-64.
Kuhn, M.G.; Anderson, R.J. Soft tempest: Hidden data transmission using electromagnetic emanations. In
Proceedings of the International Workshop on Information Hiding, Portland, OR, USA, 14-17 April 1998; pp.
124–142.
Qiao, H.; Liu, Y.; Yang, A.; Hancke, G. Preventing overshadowing attacks in self-jamming audio channels.
IEEE Trans. Dependable Secur. Comput. 2018, doi:10.1109/TDSC.2018.2873767.
Friedman, J. Tempest: A signal problem. NSA Cryptologic Spectr. 1972, 35, 76.
Smulders, P. The threat of information theft by reception of electromagnetic radiation from RS-232 cables.
Comput. Secur. 1990, 9, 53–58.
Vuagnoux, M.; Pasini, S. Compromising Electromagnetic Emanations of Wired and Wireless Keyboards. In
Proceedings of the 18th USENIX security symposium, Montreal, Canada, 10–14 August 2009; pp. 1–16.
Backes, M.; Dürmuth, M.; Gerling, S.; Pinkal, M.; Sporleder, C. Acoustic Side-Channel Attacks on Printers.
In Proceedings of the 19th USENIX Security symposium, Washington, DC, United States, 11–13 August 2010;
pp. 307–322.
Loughry, J.; Umphress, D.A. Information leakage from optical emanations. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. Secur.
(TISSEC) 2002, 5, 262–289.
Van Eck, W. Electromagnetic radiation from video display units: An eavesdropping risk? Comput. Secur.
1985, 4, 269–286.
Kuhn, M.G. Optical time-domain eavesdropping risks of CRT displays. In Proceedings of the 2002 IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy, Berkeley, CA, USA, 12–15 May 2002; pp. 3–18.
Kuhn, M.G. Compromising emanations of LCD TV sets. IEEE Trans. Electromagn. Compat. 2013, 55, 564–570.
Shumailov, I.; Simon, L.; Yan, J.; Anderson, R. Hearing your touch: A new acoustic side channel on
smartphones. arXiv 2019, arXiv:1903.11137.
Yu, J.; Lu, L.; Chen, Y.; Zhu, Y.; Kong, L. An indirect eavesdropping attack of keystrokes on touch screen
through acoustic sensing. IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. 2019, doi: 10.1109/TMC.2019.2947468.
Zhou, M.; Wang, Q.; Yang, J.; Li, Q.; Jiang, P.; Chen, Y.; Wang, Z. Stealing Your Android Patterns via Acoustic
Signals. IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. 2019, doi:10.1109/TMC.2019.2960778.
Hayashi, Y.; Homma, N.; Miura, M.; Aoki, T.; Sone, H. A threat for tablet pcs in public space: Remote
visualization of screen images using em emanation. In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM SIGSAC Conference on
Computer and Communications Security, Scottsdale, Arizona, USA, 3–7 November 2014; pp. 954–965.
Kocher, P.C. Timing attacks on implementations of Diffie-Hellman, RSA, DSS, and other systems. In
Proceedings of the Annual International Cryptology Conference, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, 18–22 August
1996; pp. 104–113.
Kocher, P.; Jaffe, J.; Jun, B. Differential power analysis. In Proceedings of the Annual International Cryptology
Conference, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, 15–19 August 1999; pp. 388–397.
Gandolfi, K.; Mourtel, C.; Olivier, F. Electromagnetic analysis: Concrete results. In Proceedings of the
International workshop on cryptographic hardware and embedded systems, Paris, France, 14–16 May 2001;
pp. 251–261.
Genkin, D.; Shamir, A.; Tromer, E. RSA key extraction via low-bandwidth acoustic cryptanalysis. In
Proceedings of the Annual Cryptology Conference, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, 17–21 August 2014; pp.
444–461.
Mangard, S.; Oswald, E.; Popp, T. Power analysis attacks: Revealing the secrets of smart cards; Springer Science &
Business Media: Berlin, Germany, 2008; Voulme 31.
Ledwaba, L.P.; Hancke, G.P.; Venter, H.S.; Isaac, S.J. Performance costs of software cryptography in securing
new-generation Internet of energy endpoint devices. IEEE Access 2018, 6, 9303–9323.
Hu, Q.; Zhang, J.; Mitrokotsa, A.; Hancke, G. Tangible security: Survey of methods supporting secure ad-hoc
connects of edge devices with physical context. Comput. Secur. 2018, 78, 281–300.

Sensors 2019, 20, 3015

36.
37.
38.

39.

40.

41.

42.
43.
44.

45.
46.

47.

48.
49.

50.
51.
52.

53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.

25 of 26

Asonov, D.; Agrawal, R. Keyboard acoustic emanations. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Security
and Privacy, Berkeley, CA, USA, 12 May 2004; pp. 3–11.
Zhuang, L.; Zhou, F.; Tygar, J.D. Keyboard acoustic emanations revisited. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. Secur.
(TISSEC) 2009, 13, 1–26.
Zhu, T.; Ma, Q.; Zhang, S.; Liu, Y. Context-free attacks using keyboard acoustic emanations. In Proceedings
of the 2014 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and communications security, Scottsdale, AZ, USA, 3–7
November 2014; pp. 453–464.
Owusu, E.; Han, J.; Das, S.; Perrig, A.; Zhang, J. Accessory: password inference using accelerometers on
smartphones. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems & Applications, San
Diego, California, 28–29 February 2012; pp. 1–6.
Liu, X.; Zhou, Z.; Diao, W.; Li, Z.; Zhang, K. When good becomes evil: Keystroke inference with smartwatch.
In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, Denver,
CO, USA, 12–16 October 2015; pp. 1273–1285.
Simon, L.; Anderson, R. Pin skimmer: Inferring pins through the camera and microphone. In Proceedings of
the Third ACM workshop on Security and privacy in smartphones & mobile devices, Berlin, Germany, 8
November 2013; pp. 67–78.
Cardaioli, M.; Conti, M.; Balagani, K.; Gasti, P. Your PIN Sounds Good! On The Feasibility of PIN Inference
Through Audio Leakage. arXiv 2019, arXiv:1905.08742.
de Souza Faria, G.; Kim, H.Y. Differential audio analysis: a new side-channel attack on PIN pads. Int. J. Inf.
Secur. 2019, 18, 73–84.
Kong, J.; Aciiçmez, O.; Seifert, J.P.; Zhou, H. Hardware-software integrated approaches to defend against
software cache-based side channel attacks. In Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE 15th International Symposium
on High Performance Computer Architecture, Raleigh, NC, USA, 14–18 February 2009; pp. 393–404.
Ambrose, J.A.; Ragel, R.G.; Parameswaran, S.; Ignjatovic, A. Multiprocessor information concealment
architecture to prevent power analysis-based side channel attacks. IET Comput. Digit. Tech. 2011, 5, 1–15.
Ambrose, J.A.; Parameswaran, S.; Ignjatovic, A. MUTE-AES: A multiprocessor architecture to prevent power
analysis based side channel attack of the AES algorithm. In Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Computer-Aided Design, San Jose, CA, USA, 10–13 November 2008; pp. 678–684.
Okeya, K.; Sakurai, K. On insecurity of the side channel attack countermeasure using addition-subtraction
chains under distinguishability between addition and doubling. In Proceedings of the Australasian
Conference on Information Security and Privacy, Melbourne, VIC, Australia, 3–5 July 2002; pp. 420–435.
Dinca, L.M.; Hancke, G.P. The fall of one, the rise of many: a survey on multi-biometric fusion methods.
IEEE Access 2017, 5, 6247–6289.
Qureshi, U.M.; Hancke, G.P.; Gebremichael, T.; Jennehag, U.; Forsström, S.; Gidlund, M. Survey of proximity
based authentication mechanisms for the Industrial Internet of Things. In Proceedings of the IECON
2018-44th Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, Washington, DC, USA, 21–23
October 2018; pp. 5246–5251.
Miller, B. Vital signs of identity [biometrics]. IEEE Spectr. 1994, 31, 22–30.
Monrose, F.; Rubin, A.D. Keystroke dynamics as a biometric for authentication. Future Gener. Comput. Syst.
2000, 16, 351–359.
Ogihara, A.; Matsumura, H.; Shiozaki, A. Biometric verification using keystroke motion and key press
timing for atm user authentication. In Proceedings of the 2006 International Symposium on Intelligent
Signal Processing and Communications, Tottori, Japan, 12–15 December 2006; pp. 223–226.
Guidorizzi, R.P. Security: active authentication. IT Prof. 2013, 15, 4–7.
Fridman, L.; Weber, S.; Greenstadt, R.; Kam, M. Active authentication on mobile devices via stylometry,
application usage, web browsing, and GPS location. IEEE Syst. J. 2016, 11, 513–521.
Halevi, T.; Saxena, N. Keyboard acoustic side channel attacks: exploring realistic and security-sensitive
scenarios. Int. J. Inf. Secur. 2015, 14, 443–456.
Rabiner, L.; Schafer, R. Digital Processing of Speech Signals; Publisher: Prentice-hall, NJ, USA, 1978.
Alpaydin, E. Introduction to machine learning; MIT press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2020.
Langley, P.; Iba, W.; Thompson, K. An analysis of Bayesian classifiers. In Proceedings of the Tenth National
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-92); San Jose, California, July 12–16 1992; Volume 90, pp. 223–228.

Sensors 2019, 20, 3015

59.
60.

61.
62.

26 of 26

Peng, C.Y.J.; Lee, K.L.; Ingersoll, G.M. An introduction to logistic regression analysis and reporting. J. Educ.
Res. 2002, 96, 3–14.
Schölkopf, B.; Simard, P.; Smola, A.J.; Vapnik, V. Prior knowledge in support vector kernels. In Proceedings
of the Advances in neural information processing systems, Denver, CO, USA, 30 November–5 December
1998; pp. 640–646.
Vatsa, M.; Singh, R.; Noore, A. Reducing the false rejection rate of iris recognition using textural and
topological features. Int. J. Signal Process. 2005, 2, 2.
Le Saint, E.F.; Wen, W.; Hamid, L. Method for improving false acceptance rate discriminating for biometric
authentication systems. US Patent 8,014,570, 6 September 2011.
c 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

