Acoustic Side Channel Attack on Keyboards Based on Typing
Patterns
Alireza Taheritajar

Reza Rahaeimehr

ataheritajar@augusta.edu
Augusta University
Augusta, GA, USA

rrahaeimehr@augusta.edu
Augusta University
Augusta, GA, USA

arXiv:2403.08740v1 [cs.CR] 13 Mar 2024

ABSTRACT
Acoustic side-channel attacks on keyboards can bypass security
measures in many systems that use keyboards as one of the input
devices. These attacks aim to reveal users’ sensitive information by
targeting the sounds made by their keyboards as they type. Most existing approaches in this field ignore the negative impacts of typing
patterns and environmental noise in their results. This paper seeks
to address these shortcomings by proposing an applicable method
that takes into account the user’s typing pattern in a realistic environment. Our method achieved an average success rate of 43%
across all our case studies when considering real-world scenarios.

CCS CONCEPTS
Figure 1: Sample of acoustic waves produced by typing a fourletter word

• Security and privacy → Side-channel analysis and countermeasures.

KEYWORDS

acoustic side-channel attacks [5], where malicious actors can extract sensitive information, such as emails, passwords, or credit
card details [18]. Such attacks can be hazardous, as they can bypass
traditional security measures like passwords [21, 26] and encryption. These attacks usually analyze the sound of each individual
key in a time or frequency domain[28].
One of the most concerning aspects of keyboard acoustic sidechannel attacks is that they can be conducted remotely without the
need for physical access to the target device [8, 24]. This makes
them an attractive target for cyber-criminals, who can easily reach
numerous users. To avoid this type of attack, it is essential to guarantee that sound cannot be captured in the environment due to the
high efficiency of modern microphones [28]. Attackers can analyze
the sound waveforms of keystrokes to determine keystrokes’ timing,
intensity, and frequency, exposing sensitive information. One of the
major difficulties in carrying out keyboard acoustic side-channel
attacks is accurately capturing the sound of keystrokes. This entails
using high-quality microphones and advanced signal-processing
techniques to eliminate background noise and extract the sound
of keystrokes. Once the sound has been captured, attackers can
use various data analysis techniques, including statistical analysis,
machine learning algorithms, signal processing techniques [24],
acoustic triangulation attack[10], and Time Difference of Arrival
(TDoA) [27].
Some past studies have demonstrated significant success with
their methodologies. However, most of them had to restrict the
environmental conditions or neglect the distinct features in their experiments to avoid any interference that could impact the outcomes.
For instance, they usually ignored the effect of environmental noise
or users’ typing patterns on their research [24]. Recognizing typing patterns is a complex task due to variations in how people

Keyboard acoustic emanations, Signal processing, Side channels,
acoustic analysis
ACM Reference Format:
Alireza Taheritajar and Reza Rahaeimehr. 2024. Acoustic Side Channel
Attack on Keyboards Based on Typing Patterns. In Proceedings of 2024
(Arxiv.org). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 8 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.
XXXXXXX

1

INTRODUCTION

There has been a growing concern over personal data and information security in recent years. With the increasing use of digital
devices and online communication, protecting sensitive data has
become crucial to modern life. The process of acquiring knowledge
about a system by analyzing its side effects is commonly referred
to as a Side-Channel Attack [24]. Electronic device emissions have
long been a concern within the security and privacy communities [6], as they are susceptible to side-channel attacks. Acoustic
side-channel attacks [2, 4] can pose a significant threat to digital
security. This type of attack takes advantage of unintended sound
emissions generated by electronic devices to extract sensitive information. One of the threats to digital security involves keyboard
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
Arxiv.org, ,
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
1

Arxiv.org, ,
A. Taheritajar, et al.

use keys[13].This variability adds to the challenge of achieving
reliable and accurate recognition, as highlighted in Asonov and
Agrawal’s study[2]. Furthermore, it is well-established that most
attributes of emanations exhibit non-uniform patterns across different device models and are often affected by environmental factors.
Another important factor that can disrupt existing methods is the
keyboard model used by the user. Usually, when the keyboard model
is changed, most algorithms can no longer maintain their previous
predictive power due to the unique sound characteristics produced
by each keyboard. In addition, recently proposed approaches, especially those that use deep learning networks, have added complexity
to obtaining stable results during training, performance, or execution. So, it is crucial to propose a novel method that covers all of
these disadvantages in this field of research. This paper explores
the concept of keyboard acoustic side-channel attacks and their
potential to compromise digital security and proposes a method
that covers aforementioned problems and weaknesses. We keep
our proposed method simple and applicable to realistic scenarios.
The process involves capturing and analyzing audio recordings of
keystrokes, extracting inter-keystroke time intervals, and keypress
timings (Figure 1). Then, we train a statistical model using this
data to predict the user’s keystrokes. The model is then tested on
unknown recorded sounds of the keystrokes of the same user to
determine its accuracy and effectiveness. Finally, we enhance our
results by filtering the wrongly predicted words by an English dictionary. By using this approach, we can analyze the typing patterns
of users and use this information to predict the texts they type,
even in real environments with ambient noise. We don’t restrict
our users to specific keyboard models.
The experiment results indicate that a user’s typing pattern in
keyboard acoustic side-channel attacks can be used to bypass security countermeasures. We collected confidential data from 20
users’ typing samples to study the effect of letter count and typing patterns on success rate. We were able to achieve a success
rate of approximately 43% on average across all of our test cases.
The threat of keyboard acoustic side-channel attacks emphasizes
the significance of having robust cybersecurity practices. By being
well-informed about the risks of acoustic side channel attacks and
implementing appropriate measures to protect sensitive data, individuals and organizations can enhance their security against this
threat.
The article is structured as follows: First, we provide a brief
overview of previous research on keyboard emanation attacks in
section 2. Then, we present our newly proposed method in section
3. In section 4, we provide experimental results, while section 5
covers the limitations and countermeasures. Finally, we conclude
the paper and propose potential future research in section 6.

2

acoustic emissions produced while typing using signal processing
techniques. Furthermore, their study revealed the ability to extract
sensitive information, such as passwords and credit card numbers,
from the sound of keystrokes.
More recently, in 2011, Genkin et al. [12] presented a significant attack that used acoustic signals to extract cryptographic keys
from a computer’s processor. The authors demonstrated the ability to extract RSA keys from laptops, desktops, and even mobile
phones using a smartphone placed near the target device. This
work showed that even highly secure cryptographic systems can
be vulnerable to acoustic side-channel attacks. In addition to attacks on computers, there have been studies on using acoustic side
channels to extract information from other devices. For example,
Quarta et al. [19] showed that it was possible to infer the content of
printed documents by analyzing the acoustic signals generated by
a printer. They showed that it was possible to reconstruct printed
text with up to 90% accuracy from acoustic signals captured by a
smartphone placed near a specific printer. Another example is the
work by O’Leary et al. [17], who showed that we can use acoustic
signals to infer the location of a smartphone in a room. By analyzing the acoustic signals generated by the smartphone’s speaker and
microphone, the authors were able to estimate the position of the
device within a few centimeters. Also, there have been studies on
using acoustic side channels to extract information from humancomputer interfaces. For example, Backes et al. [3] showed that
it was possible to infer PIN codes entered using a touchscreen by
analyzing the sound of the user’s finger tapping on the screen.
In the work by De et al. [9], a low-cost side-channel attack called
DAA (differential audio analysis) exploited the sound generated
by mechanical keypads. This attack, which was based on differential characteristics between sounds recorded by two microphones,
achieved a 100% classification rate for two tested PIN pads of the
same model. However, when applied to a different device, the success rate dropped to 63%. In [25], Toreini et al. (2015) employed
signal processing and machine learning techniques to explore the
feasibility of discerning individual Enigma keys based on the acoustic emissions they produced. Their results demonstrated that identifying these keys could be consistently achieved with a success
rate of 84%. Notably, this identification process only required basic
equipment, including a simple microphone and a personal computer. In Anand et al.’s work [1], they investigate remote keyboard
acoustic side-channel attacks and propose countermeasures. They
demonstrate the adaptability of acoustic side-channel attacks to remote eavesdropper settings and introduce a software-based defense,
using white noise and fake keystrokes to mitigate these threats
effectively. In Harrison et al.’s recent work [14], a deep learning
model was practically implemented to classify laptop keystrokes
using a smartphone microphone. Achieving a remarkable 95% accuracy with nearby phone-recorded keystrokes and a significant 93%
accuracy with Zoom-recorded keystrokes, this study showcases
the feasibility of side-channel attacks using readily available tools
and algorithms. The paper also addresses mitigation strategies to
safeguard users from these threats.
There are a lot of other approaches that prove the feasibility of
using acoustic side channel effects of keyboards to attack sensitive
data; however, often, they overlook the effect of the user’s typing
style in their studies as a critical parameter that can reduce their

RELATED WORK

There is a significant body of research on using acoustic side channels to extract information from computing devices. The studies
reviewed in this section have made significant contributions to the
understanding of keyboard acoustic side-channel attacks. In 2004,
Asonov and Agrawal [2] demonstrated the possibility of deducing
the keystrokes made by an individual on a keyboard by using a simple microphone placed nearby. They achieved this by analyzing the
2

Arxiv.org, ,
Acoustic Side Channel Attack on Keyboards Based on Typing Patterns

(a) Random Text

(b) Specific Sentence

(c) Specific Words

Figure 2: The interface of the data gathering software
success rates. In Song et al.’s study [23], they conducted a statistical
analysis of typing patterns, revealing that such patterns can divulge
key information. They utilized a Hidden Markov Model and a key
sequence prediction algorithm to predict keystrokes from interkeystroke timings. Furthermore, they devised an attacker system to
monitor SSH sessions for password learning. In the work by Liu et
al. [16], the authors introduce a novel approach to user-independent
inter-keystroke timing attacks on PINs. Their attack methodology
is based on constructing an inter-keystroke timing dictionary derived from a human cognitive model. Significantly, this model’s
parameters can be determined with a minimal amount of training
data from any users, regardless of whether they are the intended
target victims. This approach suggests the potential for large-scale
deployment in real-world scenarios. The authors explore various
online attack settings, evaluating their attack’s performance across
different levels of PIN strength. Their experimental results reveal
that the proposed attack outperforms random guessing methods
significantly.

3

model and a recording of the ambient noise of the victim place
can lead to a keyboard acoustic side-channel attack. Our method
shows that we can deduce sensitive information, such as emails and
texts, by analyzing the acoustic emissions produced while typing.
In the following sections, we will discuss the different phases of
this research in detail.

3.1

Threat Model

Our approach assumes the victim is identified. We do not restrict
our method to a specific keyboard model or brand. Moreover, we
assume that the victim typically works in a private room. Hence,
the environment noise is at the level of usual quiet individual offices
such that the noises can be controlled and handled through some
signal processing methods. We presume that we can capture some
typing samples of the victim in his working environment, including
the text and the ambient noise, which we use to build and train
our statistical models. We consider an oracle that can split the
target audio file into separate files corresponding to each word.
This is a realistic assumption because usually, after typing a word,
users press the Enter or Space keys, which generate distinguishable
sounds even by human ears.

OUR METHOD

We propose a new technique that can complement other approaches,
covering their weaknesses and defects to achieve better results. Typing pattern is often overlooked by other approaches and negatively
affects their results. We turn this negative point into a positive one.
The time interval between pressing keys on a keyboard varies for
different key pairs. However, we have noticed that an individual
tends to type a particular key pair within a similar time interval in
most cases, which is influenced by factors such as the arrangement
of keys on the keyboard, the anatomy of their hands, and personal
typing patterns. For example, we observed that the selected users
tended to type the "b" and "o" keys within a similar time in different
words, such as "both" and "book," although these time intervals
may vary from one user to another. On the other hand, there are
variations in the time intervals between different key pairs. Using
these two facts, we can model the victim’s typing pattern. This

3.2

Dataset

To build a dataset of keystroke sounds, we developed a Windowsbased application (Figure 2) using C# programming language1 that
captures a user’s typing pattern in three conditions. Firstly, after
capturing the ambient noises for the first few seconds, the user
types any desired text on their wish. Secondly, he types specific
sentences, and in the final step, he types a set of predetermined
commonly used words to capture a diverse range of typing styles
and patterns. We chose these sentences and words based on the
diversity needed to type letters and words in English.
1 Python version of this program is available (link to both software available upon

request)
3

Arxiv.org, ,
A. Taheritajar, et al.

Figure 3: Example of extracted segments related to keystrokes
Algorithm 1 Keystrokes Prediction Algorithm

Implementation Overview: When the software is executed, a
pop-up appears to inform users about the research policies and to
obtain their consent to participate in the study. Subsequently, a new
anonymous folder is created within the main Dataset folder. Following this, the software records the keystrokes and audio samples
during the three mentioned steps. The resulting dataset consists
of three audio files in WAV format and three text files for each
step. Each text file contains detailed information on each keystroke,
including the press and release TimeSpans, Key status, Virtual code,
Scan code, Caps lock status, and Shift status.
The developed software allows us to gather a comprehensive and
confidential dataset to capture diverse typing styles and patterns,
including the audio noises in the environment. We use the resulting
dataset files to train models for our attack.

3.3

Require: Trained model 𝑀, Recorded sound of typing 𝑆, Frame
length 𝑙, Number of keystrokes to predict 𝑘, Minimum time between two keystrokes 𝑚, Tolerance factor 𝑡 𝑓 .
Ensure: List of predicted words 𝑊 , list of predicted words that
exist in the dictionary 𝑊𝑐 .
Set 𝐹 = {𝑓𝑖 = 0|0 ≤ 𝑖 < |𝑆 |}.
while 𝑖 = 0 to |𝑆 | − 𝑙 do
Í −1
Set 𝑓𝑖 = 𝑖+𝑙
𝑡 =𝑖 |𝑆 [𝑡]|.
end while
while 𝑛 = 1 to 𝑘 do
Set 𝑏𝑛 = 𝑀𝑎𝑥 (𝐹 ).
Update 𝐹 = {𝑓𝑖 = 0|𝑏𝑛 − 𝑚 < 𝑖 < 𝑏𝑛 + 𝑙 + 𝑚}.
end while
Set 𝐵 = (𝑏 1, ..., 𝑏𝑘 ).
𝑆𝑜𝑟𝑡 (𝐵).
Set 𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑡 = {′′, {}} // 𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 = {𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒, 𝑐ℎ𝑖𝑙𝑑𝑟𝑒𝑛}
Set 𝐿 = {′𝑎 ′, ...,′ 𝑧 ′ }
while 𝑖 = 1 to 𝑘 − 1 do
Set Δ𝑇𝑖 = 𝑏𝑖+1 − 𝑏𝑖 .
Set 𝐶𝑖 = {(𝑘𝑎 , 𝑘𝑏 , Δ𝑎𝑏 )|𝑘𝑎 ∈ 𝐿 ∧ Δ𝑎𝑏 − 𝑡 𝑓 ≤ Δ𝑇𝑖 ≤ Δ𝑎𝑏 + 𝑡 𝑓 }
Update 𝐿 = {𝑘𝑏 |(𝑘𝑎 , 𝑘𝑏 , Δ𝑎𝑏 ) ∈ 𝐶𝑖 }
𝐴𝑑𝑑𝐶𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑇𝑜𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑒 (𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑡, 𝐶𝑖 )
end while
Set 𝑊 = 𝐺𝑒𝑡𝐴𝑙𝑙𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑠𝐹𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑅𝑜𝑜𝑡𝑇𝑜𝐿𝑒𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑠 (𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑡)
Set 𝑊𝑐 = [𝑤 ∈ 𝑊 |𝑤 ∈ 𝐷𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑟𝑦].
Return 𝑊𝑐 .

Training Statistical Model

As mentioned before, the main idea of this paper is to utilize a
user’s typing pattern to train a statistical model. In the first step,
information from the dataset gathered by each user is used to
calculate and store the time interval between two pressed keys in a
sheet called ’Data’ in an Excel file entitled ’model.xlsx’. Next, we
calculate the average and standard deviation of these time intervals
for each sequence of similar keys and store them in another sheet
called ’Analysis’ in the same Excel file. The ’Analysis’ sheet serves
as the trained model.
We utilize the information from both sheets and compare the
results. As the number of similar keystroke sequences increases,
we can see that the user types those sequences with almost identical time intervals, with only minor differences. Hence, using the
’Analysis’ sheet for larger user-generated datasets is preferable.
Moreover, by examining the standard deviation values, we can infer
the uniformity of the user’s typing pattern. The higher the standard
deviation values, the more inconsistent the user’s typing pattern,
resulting in a higher probability of errors in our algorithm. Nevertheless, we propose a coefficient to reduce such errors, which will
be discussed in the subsequent sections.

3.4

file needs to be analyzed to find the exact segments related to
each keystroke, and then they will be examined through further
processes.
3.4.1 Extracting Keystrokes Segments. The process of extracting
keystroke-related segments (e.g. Figure 3) from the audio file involves several steps. Previous works have also noted that keystrokes,
especially in the hunt-and-peck style, typically occur within a maximum duration of about 100 milliseconds, notably slower than
alternative typing methods. To begin, we employ a sliding window
with a frame size of 100 milliseconds and a hop of one, as illustrated
in Figure 4. Within this window, we calculate the sum of the absolute amplitude of the recorded audio signal. Subsequently, we

Prediction

The next step after determining the statistical model related to
each user’s typing pattern is to recognize unknown keystrokes
by analyzing the audio file recorded from their typing. The audio
4

Arxiv.org, ,
Acoustic Side Channel Attack on Keyboards Based on Typing Patterns

Figure 4: Example of detected keystrokes using proposed algorithms
systematically search for the maximum point within these sliding
windows and reset the values in the vicinity of this maximum to
zero. This resetting operation extends over a range that spans from
the index of the maximum point minus the frame length to the
index of the maximum point plus the frame length. This range alteration allows us to pinpoint the keystroke signals, as we observe
that the time intervals between keystrokes tend to be longer than
100 milliseconds. By zeroing this range, we effectively eliminate the
possibility of redundant keystroke predictions. We repeat this step
iteratively until we’ve successfully identified the total number of
keystrokes. This determination is made by listening to the recorded
file and acting as an operator to ensure accuracy in our predictions.
Since the touch and press components of each keystroke generate the loudest sounds, the maximum amplitude often occurs
within the initial ten percent of the keystroke segment. As our third
step, after identifying all desired maximum indexes associated with
each keystroke, we proceed to calculate segments corresponding
to the keystrokes within a range extending from these indexes to
indexes plus a frame length. These segments can represent the
detected keystrokes. Additionally, we can save each segment in
separate files, which can facilitate future analysis and enhance the
comprehensibility of the extracted information for further study.

3.4.3 Finding sequences of possible keystrokes. In the preceding section, we calculated time intervals between unidentified keystrokes.
Now, we seek the closest match within our statistical model for
these intervals. However, as users may not consistently type the
same key sequence at exact time intervals, we explore numbers
within a range around the calculated interval. This range extends
approximately five percent greater and five percent less than the
calculated interval. We previously mentioned that a higher standard
deviation in time values for similar keys can lead to a higher error
rate in our algorithm. To address this, we calculate coefficients for
the time intervals based on the average standard deviation and
adjust the mentioned five percent range accordingly.
Once we’ve identified all possible sequences of typed letters
for each step, we construct a decision tree-like diagram for the
subsequent steps. This diagram enables us to trace all branches
connected from the root to the final branch. Any remaining unconnected branches are pruned. In the next step, we consolidate all
connected branches, representing the potentially typed keystrokes
we’ve identified. These serve as the raw prediction results.
3.4.4 Enhancing the results using English dictionary. The previous
step generated a set of potential words typed by the user. Given our
specific focus on text content, including emails, and notes, we can
augment our prediction accuracy by employing semantic correctness approaches, such as dictionary checks or AI-based methods
like Large Language Models (LLMs) [7]. These methods enable us to
refine our predictions and ascertain the accurate sentences and text
corresponding to our predicted words. So, in the subsequent step,
we enhanced our results by searching for these words in an English
dictionary and eliminating invalid words. This process significantly
improves the accuracy of our term prediction.
The procedure outlined in this section enables us to predict the
letters the user has typed by utilizing a model trained on the user’s
typing pattern and employing a series of analytical procedures on

3.4.2 Calculation of time intervals. As previously mentioned, determining the time intervals between each keystroke can be achieved
once we have detected each segment of keystrokes. Various methods
were employed to calculate these intervals, including determining
the time between the start or end of each segment, finding intervals between the average start and end times of each segment, and
identifying the time intervals between the largest peaks within
each segment. We opted to calculate the time intervals between the
starting points of all keystroke segments. This approach yielded the
best results as it maintained the highest consistency with the values
recorded in the dataset and the statistical model we developed.
5

Arxiv.org, ,
A. Taheritajar, et al.

Figure 6: The success rate per each user

Figure 5: The effect of the number of letters on the success
rate

method, we initially tallied the number of correctly detected words
for each user’s test dataset. Following this, we calculated the average number of correct detections for each user. Subsequently, we
computed the average accuracy of our approach across all 20 users.
Figure 6 illustrates both the collective accuracy of all users and the
individual accuracy of each user. Our investigation reveals a linear
relationship between the average standard deviation (ASD) of each
user’s typing sample and the success rate of prediction. This implies
that users with a consistent typing pattern tend to have lower ASD,
resulting in a higher prediction success rate. For instance, User 13
exhibits the lowest ASD and, consequently, the highest success rate.
Our findings substantiate our initial hypothesis regarding the correlation between typing pattern and susceptibility to these types of
attacks. Additionally, we computed the average success rate across
all users as the final average success rate for our approach, which
amounts to approximately 43%.
As mentioned earlier, our aim was to simulate a highly realistic
environment and experiments. We deliberately chose:

the audio signal. In the following section, we will discuss the results
and experiments conducted.

4

EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS

This section provides a comprehensive analysis of the experimental results derived from our investigation. Our experiments were
crafted to evaluate the effectiveness and implications of the proposed acoustic side-channel attack. Our evaluation encompasses
various facets of the study, including accuracy, efficiency, and security implications.

4.1

User Study:

We conducted an IRB-approved user study to gather typing patterns
from participants. The data obtained are treated with confidentiality
and anonymity. To achieve this, we carefully selected 20 adult
users, each exhibiting their unique typing patterns, to train and test
the accuracy of our approach using their respective samples. The
constructed distinct datasets contained a test set of common English
words, such as "work", "love", "life", "like", "night", "world", "table",
"they", "have", "teacher", "book", "buy", "credit", "paper", "order",
"mobile", "mother", "cat", "run", "house", and "bill", were chosen for
their prevalence in English texts and varied word lengths. This
selection allowed us to measure the impact of word length on
prediction accuracy. The effect of the number of letters in a word
is visually represented in Figure 5. The figure indicates that the
success rate increases as the number of letters in words increases
until we reach six letters. This is because having more letters creates
a larger tree based on those letters. However, larger trees do not
necessarily result in more meaningful words. Therefore, we have
observed that in this situation, there are fewer words that result
in bigger success rates. Interestingly, after number six, we reached
the highest success rate.

4.2

• Not to eliminate acoustic noises during the data-gathering
process
• Not to restrict the keyboard model
• Not compelled participants to adopt a specific typing style,
such as hunt and peck, touch typing, two-fingered typing
• To keep our attack simulation more realistic,
• To use the laptop’s microphone, which was not a high-quality
microphone
Consequently, comparing our results with other approaches becomes challenging, as they often constrain various parameters in
their experiments to showcase the success rate of their methods.
However, we tried to compare some of our features and achievements to other similar methods in table 1.
In comparing various acoustic side-channel attack approaches on
keyboards, distinctive characteristics emerge. Cognitive modeling
[16] stands out for not requiring a large dataset and considering
both specific keyboard dependency and users’ typing patterns;
however, it does not account for environmental noise, resulting in
a relatively low success rate of 10%. Deep learning [22] demands a
large dataset, exhibits keyboard dependency, and involves complex
model training. It achieves a success rate of 84.59%, but it neglects
consideration of realistic environments. Hidden Markov Model [11]

Accuracy Assessment:

We conducted a series of experiments and calculations to assess
the accuracy of our proposed acoustic side-channel attack. The
primary objective of these evaluations was to gauge the effectiveness of our approach in predicting user keystrokes based on their
typing patterns. To assess the overall accuracy of the proposed
6

Arxiv.org, ,
Acoustic Side Channel Attack on Keyboards Based on Typing Patterns

Table 1: Comparison of Key Characteristics Among Acoustic Side Channel Attack Approaches on Keyboards
Approach

cognitive modeling [16]
Deep learning [22]
Hidden Markov Model [11]
triangulation [20]
timing dictionary [15]
Our Method

Requires
large
dataset
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No

Specific
keyboard
dependency
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Model
training
complexity
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

is notable for its lack of dataset requirement; However, we could
not find their final achievement accurately, and they overlook both
users’ typing patterns and environmental noise. Triangulation [20]
requires a large dataset and is keyboard-dependent, yet it achieves
a commendable success rate of 87.5%, neglecting considerations for
users’ typing patterns and environmental noise. Timing dictionary
[15] does not necessitate a large dataset but is keyboard-dependent,
resulting in a modest success rate of 14%, with no consideration for
users’ typing patterns or environmental noise.
Our proposed method differs by not requiring a large dataset and
minimizing keyboard dependency. It excels in considering users’
typing patterns and environmental noise, achieving a practical success rate of 43%. This highlights the trade-offs and strengths of each
approach, emphasizing the importance of tailored considerations
for real-world applicability. Our intention was to propose a practical approach aligned with real-world scenarios. Unlike approaches
that limit destructive parameters for experimental convenience, we
sought to mirror the conditions encountered in the actual world.
Note that any success rate greater than zero in real-world scenarios is a significant achievement for an attacker. Furthermore, our
proposed method can be combined with other approaches to get
better results, addressing potential shortcomings they may have.

5

typing
pattern
limitation

Environment noise
limitation

Success
Rate

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

%10
84.59%
N/A
87.5%
14.0%
43%

usually have overlaps, and we can’t detect the tying pattern
accurately.

6

CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have explored the possibility of acoustic sidechannel attacks on keyboards that are based on the user’s typing
pattern. This approach addresses some of the limitations of other
methods and provides a more realistic method that can be used
against criminal and terrorist groups.
Our proposed method uses the time differences between consecutive keystrokes to train a statistical model for extracting unknown
keystrokes from a recorded acoustic sound. To test our method,
we collected the ambient noise and typed text of 20 people based
on an IRB-approved approach, and obtained approximately a 43%
success rate through our experiments. Our results were achieved
in a realistic environment without any restrictions on users’ keyboards, typing patterns, or environmental acoustic noises, which
is a significant advantage over other approaches. We utilized an
English dictionary to enhance our text-detection abilities. However,
we intend to explore the potential of AI-powered models like LLMs
in future projects to improve our success rate.
We acknowledge that our proposed method still has some inherent limitations, such as the consistency and predictability of the
user’s typing pattern and the quality of the acoustic recorded sound.
Overall, we believe that this approach highlights the need for more
secure input methods and emphasizes the potential vulnerability
of digital security.

LIMITATIONS AND COUNTERMEASURES

We have tried to minimize our approach’s dependence on environmental conditions. However, it is a fundamental reality that if we
cannot accurately capture the sound of the keyboard, we may not be
able to precisely identify every keystroke, resulting in a reduction
in overall accuracy. Another physical limitation to consider is that
all acoustic keystroke detection methods rely on the strength of
the sound generated by the keyboards. Therefore, keyboards with
softer keys produce less sound power, which, in turn, can lead to
reduced accuracy in the final detection.
A crucial assumption in our approach is that users maintain a
consistent and detectable typing pattern throughout the datasetbuilding process. In other words, our approach can adversely affect
the success rate of these groups:

REFERENCES

• People who use computers rarely, because they do not maintain a consistent typing pattern.
• Professional typists, because they type very fast, and the
touch, key-press, and key-release events of consecutive keystrokes
7

[1] S Abhishek Anand and Nitesh Saxena. 2018. Keyboard emanations in remote
voice calls: Password leakage and noise (less) masking defenses. In Proceedings of
the Eighth ACM Conference on Data and Application Security and Privacy. 103–110.
[2] Dmitri Asonov and Rakesh Agrawal. 2004. Keyboard acoustic emanations revisited. In Proceedings of the 11th ACM conference on Computer and communications
security. ACM, 373–382.
[3] Michael Backes, Markus Durmuth, Sebastian Gerling, and Manfred Pinkal. 2013.
Acoustic side-channel attacks on touchscreens. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM
SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security. ACM, 551–562.
[4] Michael Backes, Markus Dürmuth, Sebastian Gerling, Manfred Pinkal, Caroline
Sporleder, et al. 2010. Acoustic { Side-Channel } attacks on printers. In 19th
USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 10).
[5] Yigael Berger, Avishai Wool, and Arie Yeredor. 2006. Dictionary attacks using
keyboard acoustic emanations. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM conference on
Computer and communications security. 245–254.
[6] Roland Briol. 1991. Emanation: How to keep your data confidential. In Proceedings
of Symposium on Electromagnetic Security For Information Protection. 225–234.
[7] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan,
Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda

Arxiv.org, ,
A. Taheritajar, et al.

Askell, et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural
information processing systems 33 (2020), 1877–1901.
[8] Alberto Compagno, Mauro Conti, Daniele Lain, and Gene Tsudik. 2017. Don’t
skype & type! acoustic eavesdropping in voice-over-ip. In Proceedings of the 2017
ACM on Asia Conference on Computer and Communications Security. 703–715.
[9] Gerson de Souza Faria and Hae Yong Kim. 2019. Differential audio analysis: a new
side-channel attack on PIN pads. International Journal of Information Security 18
(2019), 73–84.
[10] Au Hiu Yan Fiona. 2006. Keyboard acoustic triangulation attack. The Chinese
University Of Hong Kong: bachelors thesis (2006).
[11] Denis Foo Kune and Yongdae Kim. 2010. Timing attacks on pin input devices. In
Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer and communications security.
678–680.
[12] Daniel Genkin, Adi Shamir, and Eran Tromer. 2014. RSA key extraction via lowbandwidth acoustic cryptanalysis. In 23rd USENIX Security Symposium. USENIX
Association, 575–590.
[13] Tzipora Halevi and Nitesh Saxena. 2012. A closer look at keyboard acoustic emanations: random passwords, typing styles and decoding techniques. In Proceedings
of the 7th ACM Symposium on Information, Computer and Communications Security. 89–90.
[14] Joshua Harrison, Ehsan Toreini, and Maryam Mehrnezhad. 2023. A Practical
Deep Learning-Based Acoustic Side Channel Attack on Keyboards. In 2023 IEEE
European Symposium on Security and Privacy Workshops (EuroS&PW). IEEE, 270–
280.
[15] Ximing LIU. 2019. When keystroke meets password: Attacks and defenses.
Dissertations and Theses Collection (2019).
[16] Ximing Liu, Yingjiu Li, Robert H Deng, Bing Chang, and Shujun Li. 2019. When
human cognitive modeling meets PINs: User-independent inter-keystroke timing
attacks. Computers & Security 80 (2019), 90–107.
[17] Ryan O’Leary, Luca Rackliffe, and Johnson Agbinya. 2016. Acoustic location of
smartphones. In Proceedings of the 15th international conference on Mobile and

ubiquitous multimedia. ACM, 307–311.
[18] Sravanthi Ponnam. 2013. Keyboard Acoustic Emanations Attack: An Empirical
study.
[19] Davide Quarta, Paolo Milani Comparetti, Davide Balzarotti, and Stefano Zanero.
2018. Acoustic side-channel attacks on printers. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM
SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security. ACM, 1938–1952.
[20] Vinayak Ranade, Jeremy Smith, and Ben Switala. 2009. Acoustic side channel
attack on atm keypads.
[21] Blake Ross, Collin Jackson, Nick Miyake, Dan Boneh, and John C Mitchell. 2005.
Stronger Password Authentication Using Browser Extensions.. In USENIX Security
Symposium, Vol. 17. Baltimore, MD, USA, 32.
[22] David Slater, Scott Novotney, Jessica Moore, Sean Morgan, and Scott Tenaglia.
2019. Robust keystroke transcription from the acoustic side-channel. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual Computer Security Applications Conference. 776–787.
[23] Dawn Xiaodong Song, David Wagner, and Xuqing Tian. 2001. Timing Analysis of
Keystrokes and Timing Attacks on { SSH } . In 10th USENIX Security Symposium
(USENIX Security 01).
[24] Alireza Taheritajar, Zahra Mahmoudpour Harris, and Reza Rahaeimehr. 2023.
A Survey on Acoustic Side Channel Attacks on Keyboards. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.11012 (2023).
[25] Ehsan Toreini, Brian Randell, and Feng Hao. 2015. An acoustic side channel
attack on enigma. School of Computing Science Technical Report Series (2015).
[26] Jeff Yan, Alan Blackwell, Ross Anderson, and Alasdair Grant. 2004. Password
memorability and security: Empirical results. IEEE Security & privacy 2, 5 (2004),
25–31.
[27] Tong Zhu, Qiang Ma, Shanfeng Zhang, and Yunhao Liu. 2014. Context-free
attacks using keyboard acoustic emanations. In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM
SIGSAC conference on computer and communications security. 453–464.
[28] Li Zhuang, Feng Zhou, and J Doug Tygar. 2009. Keyboard acoustic emanations
revisited. ACM Transactions on Information and System Security (TISSEC) 13, 1
(2009), 1–26.

8

